S ince the first successful cardiac pacemaker was implanted in 1960, a variety of implantable battery-powered devices has been developed for various indications, ranging from neurological disorders to hearing loss. The development of lithium batteries in the late 1960s led to better and smaller devices, which showed multiyear longevity and high reliability {{138782020}} . Although such batteries continue to be considered as the first choice to power electronic medical implants, there are numerous efforts to develop alternative power-supply systems that are capable to operate independently over prolonged periods of time without the need for external recharging or refuelling {{5431144}}{{28447119}}{{7106132}} . Several alternatives have been explored in order to power implanted devices with energy from sources in the patient's body. However, systems that take advantage of the Seebeck thermoelectric effect, vibrations or body movements to generate power for an implanted device are limited because these techniques are dependent on the non-continuous nature of vibrations or temperature differences within the human body. GBFCs represent a more promising alternative because they are theoretically able to operate indefinitely due to the ubiquity of glucose and oxygen in the extra-cellular body fluid at constant levels of 5 3 10 23 mol L 21 and 45 3 10 26 mol L 21 , respectively {{24674192}}{{23858807}}{{28312798}}{{161439}} .
The production of electric power out of body fluids of animals, using glucose as fuel, was first envisioned in the 1970's. In their review, Kerzenmacher et al. mentioned implanted abiotic glucose fuel cells using noble metals as catalysts {{28447119}} . However, the low specificity of the catalysts and the low power output density of these implanted devices precluded further developments.
Following recent developments in nano-and biotechnology, state-of-the-art biofuel cells guarantee high specificity to the fuel, along with satisfactory power densities. These milestones have given rise to a steady growing interest in this research field {{96827564}} .
Biofuel cells often employ enzymes to catalyze chemical reactions, thereby replacing traditional catalysts present in conventional fuel cells {{11768936}}{{89226805}}{{151125}} . These systems generate electricity under mild conditions through the oxidation of renewable energy sources {{17617245}} . The advantages of biocatalysts are reactant selectivity, activity under physiological conditions, and facile manufacturability {{not_in_s2orc}} .
With the aim of developing implantable power sources in the human body, Katz and co-workers demonstrated that a GBFC can produce electricity from a snail {{11520585}} and reported more recently two ''Cyborg'' lobsters connected in-series to power a watch {{110365179}} . Rasmussen et al 17 placed a GBFC in an insect (Blaberus discoidalis, a cockroach species). Szczupak et al {{97224720}} implanted GBFCs in clams and connected three of them in series. With this setup, a capacitor could be charged, allowing an electrical motor to rotate. Although these experiments were not performed with mammals, these studies demonstrate that GBFCs can produce electricity out of living organisms. It appears that an attractive mode of operation for biofuel cells consists in the energy accumulation through capacitors for the intermittent activation of model devices. This mode of GBFC function may be applied to the activation of some sensor devices for medical monitoring.
Concerning the human implantable application, we recently reported a GBFC that is able to generate electric power inside a rat from glucose and oxygen contained in its body fluids {{14887567}} . This work was the first demonstration of an implanted GBFC delivering electrical power inside a living organism and, in particular, inside a mammal. However, both, the open-circuit voltage and power density were far below the levels required to supply implanted biomedical devices.
Our recent improvements in GBFC concepts in terms of carbon nanotube compression and direct electron transfer led to high opencircuit voltage (OCV), high power output, and stabilities over weeks {{971289}} . Taking advantage of this improved performance, we report here an original design of a GBFC, based on carbon nanotube-matrix bioelectrodes, and its successful implantation in a rat. One single implanted GBFC device of 0.24 mL volume (2.4 mL for the whole implant) produced the power required to operate, using a specially designed electronic circuit to charge a capacitor, two types of electronic devices: a LED and a digital thermometer.

Results

The bioelectrodes were formed by compression of a CNT/enzyme mixture to pellets and wired using a carbon paste {{971289}} . Such electrodes were wrapped in a dialysis membrane and placed in a perforated silicone tube ( Figure 1A), protected by a silicon layer ( Figure 1B), packed in dialysis bag, and sutured inside a DacronH sleeve ( Figure 1C). The GBFC was surgically implanted in the abdominal cavity of a rat where the wires were tunnelled up to the head. These wires were then soldered to a female connector and fixed on the skull ( Figure 1D and E). Details about the GBFC production and implantation can be found in the methods section.
The performance of four biofuel cells implanted in four different rats was characterized electrochemically. Figure 2A shows the evolution of the OCV values of four implanted biofuel cells. The measured maximum OCVs, obtained after 6-8 days, were in the range 510-660 mV ( Figure 2B) and reflect the difference between the redox potential of laccase at the biocathode and the redox potential of GOx at the bioanode. Figure 2C represents the variation of the current as function of the biofuel cell voltage. For applied current between 150 and 700 mA cm 22 the average voltage measured after 300 s of chronopotentiometry varies from 535 mV to 220 mV. Moreover, these GBFCs can continuously deliver electricity over 10 minutes at an applied discharge current of 150 mA cm 22 , producing 9.3 3 10 23 J. It should be noted that the voltage decreased slowly from 0.55 to 0.48 V, as it is displayed in the discharge curve of the implanted GBFC of rat 2 ( Figure 2D).
To examine more accurately the GBFC voltage evolution, the latter was continuously recorded for an intermittent use of GBFC consisting of 5 minutes discharge at 50 mA cm 22 followed by 7 minutes recovery at zero current. For four successive cycles, it appears that, during the discharge period, the GBFC loses less than 20 mV of its initial voltage. Furthermore, the voltage increased when the discharge was stopped, reaching its initial value after 7 minutes ( Figure 2E).
These results clearly demonstrate that the implanted GBFCs are able to recover their equilibrium state after the discharge period. The time necessary to reach the initial equilibrium state is most likely due to the consumption of glucose and oxygen at the vicinity or inside the porous bioelectrodes during the GBFC discharge. These successive on-off discharge cycles indicate that this GBFC is able to deliver 50 mA cm 22 during a total of 25 minutes of discharge per hour without alterating its performance.
With the aim to illustrate the potential of implanted GBFC for powering real electronic devices, the implanted GBFC was connected to a boost converter (step-up converter) and applied to power a lightemitting diode (LED) that consumes 1.31 3 10 23 J (details in the method section). Figure 3A shows the illuminated LED connected to the GBFC via this boost converter. The related video (see supplementary informations) shows 5 successive flashes of the LED using this step-up. Taking into account the average time of energy  In the same way, the implanted GBFC, combined with adapted electric circuitry, was used to power an electric thermometer that requires about 75 mW. Figure 3B and 3C shows the digital display of the powered and non-powered electric thermometer. It appears that the temperature is measured and displayed on an LCD screen when the device is connected to the GBFC. These results clearly show that the implanted GBFC can be considered as a real power source that is able to supply power to medical electronic devices.
Autopsies performed on the rats after 10 to 17 days show that the external side of the implant starts to be covered by a thin layer of vascularized tissues (See for instance rat 4, Figure 4A). After 110 days implantation in rat 1, the implant is surrounded by thick adherent adipose tissue richly vascularized ( Figure 4B). The DacronH bag, conventionally used for implants, ensures excellent biocompatibility for the GBFC. To investigate whether the implanted GBFC can modify the physical fitness of the rat or its eating habits, we monitored daily the weight of the rat and the food consumed during more than 3 months. These observations were monitored with two rats: one rat implanted with a functional GBFC (rat 1) and another with a pseudo-GBFC containing BSA instead of enzymes (control rat). After a small weight loss due to the surgical intervention, the rat's weight increases gradually in a normal manner ( Figure 4C) with an average food intake of 26 6 3 g per day ( Figure 4D). Nevertheless, it should be noted that this behavior does not reflect the biocompatibility of the electronic device in operation for three months due to the loss of connection with the biofuel cell after 9 days.

Methods

Instrumentation. The electrochemical characterization and the biofuel cell tests were performed with an Autolab potentiostat 100 (Eco Chemie, Utrecht, The Netherlands).
Procedures to fabricate the bioelectrodes and the GBFC. The enzymes are mechanically confined into a CNT matrix by compression of a CNT/enzyme mixture as reported 20 , affording direct electrical wiring between the redox active center and the electrode. Furthermore, the CNT matrix ensures high conductivity and high porosity, necessary for the diffusion of substrates. The bioelectrodes used for implantation are pellets with 6 mm thickness and 5 mm in diameter. Although only laccase is used at the cathode, GOx is combined with catalase at the anode. Catalase catalyzes the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, produced by unwired GOx and hence prevents enzyme deactivation and serves for local oxygen depletion {{25780509}} . The whole GBFC was then formed by connecting the bioanode and biocathode.
Miniaturized insulated wires (UBA3219, industrifil) are connected to the CNT pellets via a conductive ink (Electrodag 423SS) (see manuscript: Fig. 1A bottom). Each pellet was then wrapped in a cellulose acetate membrane (see manuscript: Fig. 1A middle). These electrodes were then inserted into a perforated silicone sleeve (inner diameter: 5 mm) (see manuscript: Fig. 1A top) and enclosed by a silicone ring. Before use, the dialysis membrane, solutions and catheters were sterilized using an autoclave. The wires were then introduced into a biocompatible silicone tubing (721048, Harvard Apparatus; 1.9 mm outside diameter) that were then filled to a length of 3 cm with medical grade silicone. Silicone was also used to cover the non-biocatalytic parts of the silicone mould (see manuscript: Fig. 1.B). Thus, no wound or trauma can be imputed to the electrical circuitry and the wires were protected from short circuits.
The bagging of the implanted cell was carried out under a laminar flow hood under sterile conditions. The silicone sleeve containing the electrodes is inserted in a 16 mm flat width dialysis bag with a 100-500 Daltons MWCO (131054 Spectrumlabs). The bag is then filled with approximately 1 mL sterile Ringer solution and closed while  avoiding air bubbles. The biocompatibility of the resulting device in the rat is due to an autoclaved DacronH sleeve, wrapped around the dialysis bag, cut to the right volume, and then sutured with surgical filament (see manuscript: Fig. 1C).
Surgical implantation of the GBFC inside a rat. Male Wistar rats weighing 300-560 g were anesthetized with isoflurane under inhalational conditions. A median laparotomy was performed to insert the implant into the retroperitoneal space in left lateral position. The catheters containing the wires of the GBFC are subcutaneously tunnelled from the abdomen up to the head of the rat (see manuscript: Fig. 1D and 1E). The wires were then soldered to a female microconnector (BL3.36Z fischer electronik) which was insulated and fixed to the skull by acrylic cement {{6661257}} . The GBFC was implanted in the retroperitoneal space (Fig. 1E) of the rat because the composition of the extracellular fluid in terms of glucose and oxygen is the same as in blood. The muscular abdominal wall and the skin were finally sutured separately and the animals allowed to recover from anaesthesia. After surgery, the animals received a single injection of an analgesic (Rimadyl, 5 mg kg 21 , i.m.).
After implantation, the rats were left to recover 24 hours. Each day, the rats were connected to a potentiostat to measure the open circuit voltage of the implanted GBFC.
The rats were not immediately sacrificed after the performance studies in order to evaluate the biocompatibility of the implants. As required, the rats were euthanized under anaesthesia (sodium pentobarbital 50 mg kg 21 , i.p.) by intra-cardiac injection of sodium pentobarbital (100 mg).
Power management of the glucose biofuel cell. Two different electronic devices have been designed to demonstrate the power management of the implanted biofuel cell. One is for powering a common medical digital thermometer (power consumption: 50 mA at 1.5 V) and another to light a LED (4.1 mA at 2.9 V). Both electronic designs are based on a low input voltage boost converter (BQ25504, Texas instruments, Dallas, Texas, USA). The global efficiency of this circuit is well-suited to these devices because it is optimized to operate within the GBFC's characteristics (input voltage: 0.3 V to 0.6 V, input current: 10 to 100 mA, output voltage: up to 3 V). For instance, the power efficiency of the voltage boost converter was around 75% for the LED demonstrator (average input voltage: 0.5 V for an average current of 70 mA and average output voltage of 2.9 V for an average current of 4.1 mA). The principle of the power management is the same for both demonstrators (thermometer and LED), whereby a capacitor is charged by the GBFC driving the boost voltage converter. When the capacitor voltage reaches a predetermined value, the stored power is released until the capacitor voltage decreases down to a determined value. The cycle is repeated as long as the device is charged by the biofuel cell. In the case of the demonstrator to power-on the thermometer, a capacitor value of 220 mF was chosen in order to keep the temperature displayed on an LCD screen for 10 s after a capacitor charge cycle of one minute. Regarding the LED demonstrator, the diode flashed for about 88 ms after 28 s, 52 s, 81 s, 115 s, and 169 s.




CITED_PAPERS:


14887567:A Glucose BioFuel Cell Implanted in Rats


Introduction

Artificial implanted organs are an attractive solution to terminal failures of organs such as pancreas, urinary sphincters, kidneys or heart, but their development is thwarted by the problem of their energy supply. Sealed batteries are adequate for pacemakers [1] that consume about 10 mW, but not for more demanding applications, so that cumbersome devices are still in use, and that innovative implantable solutions are not even under research. An instance of a cumbersome device is the manual Artificial Urinary Sphincter, powered by the patient himself via a pump inserted in his scrotum, which he has to press to enable micturition. This is the only solution available today for the 10,000 new patients each year suffering from incontinence after Radical Prostatectomy [2], while a Robotized Artificial Urinary Sphincter would provide much more comfort and ease of use, but would require about 200 mW in our estimations [3]. Though Wearable Artificial Kidneys begin to be developed [4], research on Implanted Artificial Kidneys can hardly be envisaged until a permanent source of power can provide the mean 20 mW necessary for the osmotic work of kidneys in human beings. Of course, energy can be provided by transcutaneous transfer, using electro-magnetic coupling with an external source; but with the exception of cochlear implants, where a simple and miniaturized device can be used, transcutaneous energy transfer is very constraining for the patient, who accepts this only in specific cases such as artificial hearts [5], where immediate survival is at stake. Physiological constraints limit to about 100 mW the expectation of energy harvesting from Seebek thermoelectric effect, vibrations or body movements [6].
Glucose fuel cells look very promising as a source of power for implanted devices, because they could exploit glucose and dioxygen from the ECF as a source of power. Pioneering work by Drake and colleagues in the seventies raised hopes that abiotic catalysts could oxidise glucose and reduce dioxygen sufficiently efficiently to enable powering of implanted medical devices [7]. This approach had been abandoned until very recently [8], mainly because the power density was not sufficient. GBFCs exploit enzymes as catalysts, which are electrically wired by redox mediators [9][10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18]. Some GBFCs are at a pre-industrial stage and feature a substantial power output, arising a great interest as a source of ''green power'' for nomadic devices, while others are based on microelectrodes, exhibiting excellent ratios of power to electrode surface but low total power. Sony recently produced an instance of the former, a GBFC of 80 mL generating 100 mW under 0.30 V when fed with a glucose solution of 400 mM [19]. Unfortunately, glucose concentration in the Extra-Cellular Fluid (ECF) is only 5 mM, and the concentration of molecular oxygen, another important substrate of the GBFC, is markedly lower in blood (45 mM) than in aqueous solutions under air (200 mM).
Heller and colleagues developed an instance of the latter: a micro GBFC based on bilirubin oxidase. They obtained 4.4 mW at 37uC in a physiological, glucose-enriched, buffer solution (pH 7.2, 0.14 M NaCl, 20 mM phosphate, 30 mM glucose, 0.2 mM dioxygen) [20]. The most powerful GBFC was developed by Mano [21], who increased the power density of Heller's GBFC from 90 to 280 mW cm 22 at low glucose concentration by using Glucose Oxidase (GOX) from Penicillium pinophilum, instead of the conventional GOX from Aspergillus niger. However, all existing GBFC, preindustrial ones and microelectrode-based ones, use a biocathode exclusively based on bilirubin oxidase or laccase enzymes for oxygen reduction. The former requires low pH and is inhibited by chloride, while the latter is inhibited by urate anions [22][23][24], thus preventing their use in ECF (whose pH is about 7, and which contains chloride The anode is constituted of a compacted graphite disc containing ubiquinone, glucose oxidase (GOX) and catalase, while the cathode is composed of a compacted graphite disc containing quinhydrone and polyphenol oxidase (PPO). The cathode is inserted in a dialysis bag (cut-off 100 g mol 21 ), in order to prevent quinhydrone diffusion. Both electrodes are packed in an external dialysis bag (cutoff 6-8000 g mol 21 ) that lets glucose and dioxygen flow into the device. The current generated by the GBFC results from the oxidation of ubiquinol combined with the reduction of quinone. Ubiquinol and quinone are enzymatically generated by GOX and PPO respectively. (B) GBFC preparation and implantation. Each electrode measures 0.133 mL, so that the complete device can fit in the abdomen of the animal. The rat is anesthetized, a median laparotomy is performed, and the GBFC is inserted into the retroperitoneal space in left lateral position. The catheters containing the copper wires connected to the anode and cathode are subcutaneously tunnelled from the abdomen up to the back of the head of the animal, and connected to the potentiostat. Finally, the muscular abdominal wall and the skin are separately sutured and the animal is allowed to recover from anesthesia. (C) GBFC operation. 4 hours after implantation, cycles of discharge (at constant current of 10 mA) and of charge are recorded via a potentiostat until sacrifice of the animal. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010476.g001 and urate anions). In order to operate a GBFC implanted in the human body, a new concept of GBFC using enzymes compatible with the characteristics of ECF has to be developed.
The ideal GBFC for operation in ECF should use enzymes and redox mediators capable of working in ECF, and be robust and easy to assemble into relatively big electrodes. We achieved this by an original mechanical confinement of the enzymes and redox mediators inside the electrodes. This enables use of several types of enzymes and redox mediators, which allowed us to select those that proved capable to work in the ECF and to produce a power compatible with the requirements of a pacemaker and potentially sufficient for powering a Robotized Artificial Urinary Sphincter.

Results


''Mechanically Confined'' implantable GBFCs working with various enzymes and redox mediators

In contrast to current GBFCs, where enzymes and redox mediators are covalently bound to the electrode, we mechanically confined the contents of the electrodes, by use of dialysis membranes and/or mechanical compression of graphite particles, enzymes and redox mediators (Materials and Methods). This process, summarized in Figure 1, required simple procedures involving classical chemicals and materials, and allowed use of soluble (quinone, hydroquinone) or poorly-soluble (ubiquinone, ubiquinol) redox mediators, and of different enzymes (GOX at the anode, PPO or urease at the cathode). One of these GBFCs used as fuel not only glucose, but also urea.

In vitro demonstration of performance of our ''Mechanically Confined'' Quinone-Ubiquinone GBFC with GOX and PPO

We experimented in vitro our Quinone-Ubiquinone GBFC, under a concentration of glucose similar to that of ECF (5.5 10 23 mol L 21 glucose), and with a phosphate buffer of 2.5 10 22 mol L 21 yielding a pH of 7.2 (thus simulating the pH of ECF, which is controlled by a very efficient bicarbonate buffer), the two electrodes being wrapped in the expanded PolyTetraFluroroEthylene (exPTFE) membrane that was used later for in vivo experiments. The operational stability of this GBFC was evaluated for a constant current of 10 mA in these conditions. The voltage and hence the cell power decreased to ca. 9% (0.15 mW) of the initial value over 1 hr, and then the GBFC maintained a quasi-constant power (1.47 mW), delivering 10 mA during 25 hrs. To demonstrate the stability of the GBFC, we recorded its performances for 40 days (Fig. 2). Open circuit voltage (OCV) was continuously monitored, while power-voltage profile and discharge at constant current (5 mA) for 10 min were daily recorded. The performances of the GBFC (power, open circuit voltage OCV  and discharge) first increased from the first to the second day. The average maximum power from 30 to 40 days was about 1.65 mW (standard deviation 0.13 mW), reflecting an excellent operational stability. The performance of the GBFC was not diminished over time, since the OCV reached 250 mV during the last two weeks, discharge curves keeping the same shape.
In vivo demonstration of performance of our Quinone-Ubiquinone GBFC Having shown in vitro power generation by our Quinone-Ubiquinone GBFC, we next ascertained whether it was able to work when implanted in an animal. A male Wistar rat (514 g weight) was anesthetized and this GFBC was surgically inserted into its retroperitoneal space, enabling glucose and O 2 from the ECF to flow into the GBFC. After the rat had recovered from anesthesia and was allowed unrestricted movement, cell performance was evaluated (Fig. 3). The OCV of the GBFC was 0.275 V while the maximum power was 6.5 mW (at 0.13 V), yielding a maximum specific power of 24.4 mW mL 21 . The voltage decreased from 0.27 to 0.22 V during the first 80 min and was then quasi-stable, with a slow decrease of 9 mV h 21 . These experiments confirmed the capacity of a GBFC to work in ECF and to produce 2 mW (7.52 mW mL 21 ) for several hours.

Demonstration of performance over an extended period of time

In order to power implanted organs, a GBFC must prove over an extended period of time that it can remain functional, and that it can extract sufficient glucose and O 2 from the ECF. We carried out stability experiments consisting in daily recording the power-voltage profile (during discharges at 5 mA for 10 min) for an implanted GBFC. As previously observed, after an initial increase, the performances (power 1.8 mW and OCV 200 mV) for a smaller rat (444 g weight) remained stable (standard deviation 0.17 mW) until sacrifice of the animal after 11 days. Regarding long term glucose and O 2 extraction from the ECF, we implanted in the retroperitoneal space of a rat a dialysis tubing of 4 mL wrapped in an exPTFE coating, containing GOX and catalase, and monitored during 3 months the production of gluconate in the daily urines of the animal (Materials and Methods S1). At sacrifice, no sign of inflammatory reaction against the implant was observed, while a neo-vascular network had developed around the implant (Fig. 4). A mean daily production of 555 mmoles day 21 of gluconate was measured.

In vitro and in vivo demonstration of performance of ''Mechanically Confined'' Quinhydrone pH-based Glucose and Urea BioFuel Cell working with GOX and urease

In order to demonstrate that the concept of ''mechanical confinement'' allows use of several types of enzymes and redox mediators, we developed and tested another instance of a ''Mechanically Confined'' GBFC, based on the dependence on pH of the potential of quinhydrone, an equimolar mixture of quinone (Q) and hydroquinone (QH 2 ). The principle of this BioFuel Cell, which uses as fuel both glucose and urea and is detailed in Materials and Methods, is summarized in Figure 5. An in vitro demonstrator showed that this principle led to a DpH of 4.8 generating under 10 mA a potential difference of 265 mV, corresponding to a maximum power of 2.65 mW. Power of 3 nW was obtained during 45 min after implantation in the retroperitoneal space of a rat (Fig. 5), illustrating the viability of this concept in vivo.

Discussion

These experiments are the first ones reporting successful operation of a GBFC inside an animal. This was made possible by an innovative reduction of O 2 into water by PPO, an enzyme capable to work efficiently in the specific conditions of the Extra-Cellular Fluid, which is not the case of enzymes such as laccase or bilirubin oxidase, classically used in GBFCs. Use of this enzyme was facilitated by the application of a very simple process of construction of the electrodes, based on mechanical confinement of redox mediators and of enzymes, which provides a cheap and simple alternative to the classical electric wiring obtained by covalent binding of these elements on an electron collector. This process allows use of virtually any type of enzymes and redox mediators that would be capable to work in the ECF. We proved that pH-based BioFuel Cells exploiting as fuel not only glucose, but also urea, could work. Though the enzymes we used for this pH-based BioFuel Cell work in ECF conditions, the potential of this specific approach seems today limited to in vitro applications, until a solution is found to isolate the GBFC from the bicarbonate buffer of the ECF. Indeed, the difference of power between in vitro and in vivo experiments suggests that this very efficient buffer (about 25 mM) prevents in vivo application of this specific approach.
We obtained a stable in vivo production of 2 mW in a device of some mL whose electrodes are 0.133 mL. This power may look limited, when compared to the 4.4 mW obtained by Heller and colleagues [20]. However, the major difference lies in the fact that our performances were recorded with a device implanted inside the ECF of a rat, while the results reported by Heller and colleagues were obtained in vitro. Besides, in the latter experiment, the solution was enriched in glucose (30 mM glucose) and under air (so that the concentration of dioxygen was 200 mM), which are significantly different conditions with respect to those of ECF (where glucose is below the 5 mM of blood glucose level and dioxygen below the 45 mM of venous level).
An important issue will be to demonstrate that our GBFC can work during months or years when implanted in animals. We demonstrated that an implant with GOX and catalase remained operational during 3 months, and kept capable to produce about 100 times more gluconate than what our GBFC did to produce 2 mW. Indeed, according to Faraday's law, since in our GBFC each mole of glucose provides two moles of electrons, our GBFC consumes each day 4.5 mmoles of glucose, in order to produce 2 mW under 200 mV. This figure should be compared to the daily consumption of 555 mmoles of glucose reported in section 2.4 with a 4 mL device containing GOX. This experiment tends to prove that extraction of glucose from ECF will not be the limiting factor to improve the performance of our GBFC. The fact that GOX remained operational during 3 months is very encouraging, and is corroborated by experiments reported by Minteer [25], who proved that implanted enzymes could be kept fully operational during more than one year, in conditions similar to the ones requested by our GBFC concept.
With its present design, our GBFC is capable to produce a peak power of 24.4 mW mL 21 , and a stable power of more than 7.52 mW mL 21 . This is already significant with respect to the requirements of medical devices (typically 10 mW for a pacemaker [1]). Though sealed batteries are perfectly adequate for pacemakers (they have to be surgically replaced after 5 to 8 years, which is quite acceptable), their use in applications requesting 200 mW or more would require significant increase in the performance they reach today in clinical practice (since they would have to be replaced about twice a year). It should be noted that early pacemakers had volumes up to 90 mL 1 , which shows that implanted devices of such a big volume can be accepted, provided that there is a significant medical added-value. With our present level of stable performance, we could expect to generate in an animal such as a pig about 1 mW with a battery of about 133 mL. We are beginning to explore the possibility to use this approach to power a Robotized Artificial Urinary Sphincter, which requires in our estimations about 200 mW [3], corresponding to a GBFC similar to the ones we tested, but of about 26 mL. This is about the size of the balloon that is implanted today in the abdomen of patients to whom manually-controlled Artificial Urinary Sphincters are proposed [2]. We also expect significant improvement from the use of other enzymes and redox mediators. Indeed, the concept of mechanical confinement enables straightforward . This bag separates the redox species from the enzymes contained in a second dialysis bag with a nominal cut-off of 6-8000 g mol 21 . This second dialysis bag contains GOX and catalase for the anode, and urease for the cathode. The two electrodes are packed together in a DacronH sleeve. (B) Electro-chemical reactions at the electrodes. Action of the GOX at the cathode locally decreases the pH, while action of the urease at the anode locally increases pH. Nernst law governs the difference of potential between anode and cathode (subscripts a is used in this equation to identify pH and concentrations of species at the anode, subscript c denoting the cathode). At the cathode, quinone (Q) is reduced into hydroquinone (QH 2 ), while at the anode hydroquinone (QH 2 ) is oxidised into quinone (Q). (C) Discharge curve under 100 nA. This curve was recorded after implantation in the retroperitoneal space of a rat, for a constant current of 100 nA. It corresponds to a mean power of 3 nW during 45 minutes. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010476.g005
integration of any such enzyme or redox mediator, so that it is not unrealistic to get with GBFCs exploiting the concepts we described to produce tens of mW or more, thus opening possibilities for research on new generations of implanted medical devices.

Materials and Methods


Ethics Statements

The care of the rats was approved by the European Communities Council Directive Animal Care and Use Committee and performed in accordance to their guiding principles (European Communities Council Directive L358-86/609/EEC). All protocols involving living animals were performed under license from the French Ministry of Agriculture (License number 38018).
''Mechanically Confined'' Quinone-Ubiquinone GBFC with GOX and PPO Mechanical compression of graphite particles, enzymes and redox mediators provided mechanically stable composite discs of 0.133 mL, and allowed the coimmobilisation of poorly soluble redox mediators such as coenzyme Q10 or ubiquinone, and hence a non-covalent electric wiring (Materials and Methods S1). A platinum wire fixed on one side of the disc by a conductive adhesive connected each composite graphite disc. A schematic representation of our process is outlined in Figure 1. The anode contained a mixture of graphite, ubiquinone, glucose oxidase (GOX) and catalase. The cathode contained quinhydrone, combined with polyphenol oxidase (PPO) and graphite, and was inserted in a cellulose acetate dialysis bag with a nominal cut-off of 100 g mol 21 to prevent diffusion of quinhydrone. The two electrode discs were placed face to face, with the platinum wire outside, and then inserted in an external dialysis bag with a nominal cut-off of 6-8000 g mol 21 . Each isolated platinum wire was inserted in a catheter onto which the external dialysis bag was sealed. The external dialysis bag prevented any diffusion of enzymes. Glucose and O 2 from the outside flowed into the device across the external dialysis bag. In presence of glucose, GOX generated ubiquinol from ubiquinone while catalase eliminated H 2 O 2 produced by the side reaction of dioxygen with GOX. In the presence of dioxygen, PPO catalysed the oxidation of phenols and di-phenols into quinoid products, dioxygen being reduced into water. Thus, at the cathode PPO regenerated the quinone form reduced previously into hydroquinone by the battery reaction. In contrast to laccase and bilirubin oxidase, PPO could efficiently operate at pH 7 and was not inhibited by products present in physiological fluids. The circuit was then closed with a potentiostat enabling automatic external resistance adaptation in order to keep a constant current in the circuit.
''Mechanically Confined'' Quinhydrone pH-based Glucose and Urea BioFuel Cell working with GOX and urease Each electrode comprised a carbon felt inserted in a first dialysis bag with a nominal cut-off of 100 g mol 21 , initially containing quinhydrone (Materials and Methods S1). Each bag was then inserted in a second dialysis bag with a nominal cut-off of 6-8000 g mol 21 , containing GOX and catalase for the anode, and urease for the cathode. The two electrodes were packed together in an exPTFE membrane. In the presence of O 2 , GOX and catalase catalyze the production of gluconate and protons at the cathode, while urease activity on urea creates hydroxyl ions at the anode. According to the Nernst equation, the gradient of pH between the two electrodes, which contain the same couple of pH-sensitive redox mediators, modifies the electrical potential of each electrode and generates electron exchanges.

Materials and Methods S1

Detailed presentations of the following materials and methods are described in the separate ''Materials and Methods S1'' file.

Supporting Information

Materials and Methods S1 Supplementary Materials and Methods for A Glucose BioFuel Cell Implanted in Rats. Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010476.s001 (0.07 MB DOC)

Figure 1 .

1Summary of the principle, preparation, implantation and operation of an implantable ''Quinone-Ubiquinone Glucose BioFuel Cell''. (A) GBFC principle.

Figure 2 .

2In vitro performances of a Quinone-Ubiquinone GBFC. The GBFC is immersed in 50 mL HEPES buffer (2.5 10 22 mol L 21 ; pH 7.2) containing 5.5 10 23 mol L 21 glucose and 0.15 mol L 21 NaCl. (A) Power-voltage profile; i) first day, ii) second day, iii) sixth day, iv) twenty fourth day, v) twenty ninth day vi) fortieth day. (B) Maximum power (&) and OCV (+) as a function of time. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010476.g002

Figure 3 .

3Performance of a ''Quinone-Ubiquinone GBFC'' implanted in a male Wistar rat (514 g weight). (A) Power-voltage profile. A peak power of 6.5 mW is observed at 0.13 V, yielding a maximum specific power of 24.4 mW mL 21 . (B) Discharge curve. Discharge of the GBFC starts 4 hours after implantation. The chronopotentiometry was recorded for a constant current (10 mA). A stable production of more than 2 mW is observed for several hours. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010476.g003

Figure 4 .

4Implants containing both Glucose Oxidase and catalase, before and after implantation in a rat. Implants containing both GOX and catalase, immobilized on barium alginate beads, in dialysis tubing wrapped in an exPTFE coating. (A) Before implantation. (B) After 3 months of implantation. A neo-vascular network can be seen, no sign of inflammation is present, proving the good tolerance of the rat for the implant. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010476.g004

Figure 5 .

5Implantable ''Quinhydrone pH-based Glucose and Urea BioFuel Cell'' with mechanically confined electrodes. (A) Schematic representation. In each electrode, the redox species, quinone (Q) and hydroquinone (QH2) are confined close to a carbon felt by a first dialysis bag (nominal cut-off of 100 g mol 21 )
May 2010 | Volume 5 | Issue 5 | e10476
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
AcknowledgmentsWe thank O. Cinquin and D. Martin for critical discussions and reading of the manuscript.Author Contributions
Improvements in pacemaker energy consumption and functional capability: four decades of progress. O J Ohm, D Danilovic, Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 201Ohm OJ, Danilovic D (1997) Improvements in pacemaker energy consumption and functional capability: four decades of progress. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 20 (1): 2-9.
Longterm durability and functional outcomes among patients with artificial urinary sphincters: a 10-year retrospective review from the University of Michigan. S P Kim, Z Sarmast, S Daignault, G J Faerber, E J Mcguire, J Urol. 1795Kim SP, Sarmast Z, Daignault S, Faerber GJ, McGuire EJ, et al. (2008) Long- term durability and functional outcomes among patients with artificial urinary sphincters: a 10-year retrospective review from the University of Michigan. J Urol 179(5): 1912-1916.
Design and implementation of an automated artificial urinary sphincter. H Lamraoui, P Mozer, G Robain, A Bonvilain, S Basrour, Lamraoui H, Mozer P, Robain G, Bonvilain A, Basrour S, et al. (2008) Design and implementation of an automated artificial urinary sphincter. Avalaible: pHealth, Valencia, http://www.phealth2008.com/Events/papers/p22.pdf. Ac- cessed 2010 April 13.
A wearable haemodialysis device for patients with end-stage renal failure: a pilot study. A Davenport, V Gura, C Ronco, M Beizai, C Ezon, Lancet. 370Davenport A, Gura V, Ronco C, Beizai M, Ezon C, et al. (2007) A wearable haemodialysis device for patients with end-stage renal failure: a pilot study. Lancet 370: 2005-2010.
The AbioCor implantable replacement heart. R Dowling, L Gray, S Etoch, H Laks, D Marelli, The Annals of Thoracic Surgery. 75Dowling R, Gray L, Etoch S, Laks H, Marelli D, et al. (2003) The AbioCor implantable replacement heart. The Annals of Thoracic Surgery 75(6, 1): S93-S99.
Micropower for medical applications. J Y Kang, Encyclopedia of Medical Devices and Instrumentation. Kang JY (2006) Micropower for medical applications. In Encyclopedia of Medical Devices and Instrumentation. pp 428-434.
A tissue implantable fuel cell power supply. R F Drake, B K Kusserow, S Messinger, S Matsuda, Trans Am Soc Artif Intern Organs. 16Drake RF, Kusserow BK, Messinger S, Matsuda S (1970) A tissue implantable fuel cell power supply. Trans Am Soc Artif Intern Organs 16: 199-205.
Energy harvesting by implantable abiotically catalyzed glucose fuel cells. S Kerzenmacher, J Ducrée, R Zengerle, F Von Stetten, Journal of Power Sources. 182Kerzenmacher S, Ducrée J, Zengerle R, von Stetten F (2008) Energy harvesting by implantable abiotically catalyzed glucose fuel cells. Journal of Power Sources 182: 1-17.
Biofuel cell based on glucose oxidase and microperoxidase-11 monolayer-functionalized electrodes. I Willner, E Katz, F Patolskya, A F Bückmann, J Chem Soc Perkin Trans. 2Willner I, Katz E, Patolskya F, Bückmann AF (1998) Biofuel cell based on glucose oxidase and microperoxidase-11 monolayer-functionalized electrodes. J Chem Soc Perkin Trans 2: 1817-1822.
A laccase-glucose oxidase biofuel cell prototype operating in a physiological buffer. F Barrière, P Kavanagh, D Leech, Electrochimica Acta. 51Barrière F, Kavanagh P, Leech D (2006) A laccase-glucose oxidase biofuel cell prototype operating in a physiological buffer. Electrochimica Acta 51: 5187-5192.
Enzymatic biofuel cells. P Atanassov, C Apblett, S Banta, S Brozik, S C Barton, Electrochemical Society Interface. 162Atanassov P, Apblett C, Banta S, Brozik S, Barton SC, et al. (2007) Enzymatic biofuel cells. Electrochemical Society Interface 16(2): 28-31.
A biofuel cell with enhanced power output by grape juice. Y Liu, S Dong, Electrochemistry Communications. 9Liu Y, Dong S (2007) A biofuel cell with enhanced power output by grape juice. Electrochemistry Communications 9: 1423-1427.
A membrane-, mediator-, cofactor-less glucose/oxygen biofuel cell. V Coman, C Vaz-Dominguez, R Ludwig, W Harreither, D Haltrich, Phys Chem Chem Phys. 10Coman V, Vaz-Dominguez C, Ludwig R, Harreither W, Haltrich D, et al. (2008) A membrane-, mediator-, cofactor-less glucose/oxygen biofuel cell. Phys Chem Chem Phys 10: 6093-6096.
Enzymes as working or inspirational electrocatalysts for fuel cells and electrolysis. J A Cracknell, K A Vincent, F A Armstrong, Chem. Rev. 108Cracknell JA, Vincent KA, Armstrong FA (2008) Enzymes as working or inspirational electrocatalysts for fuel cells and electrolysis. Chem. Rev 108: 2439-2461.
A biofuel cell with enhanced performance by multilayer biocatalyst immobilized on highly ordered macroporous electrode. L Deng, F Wang, H Chen, L Shang, L Wang, Biosensors and Bioelectronics. 24Deng L, Wang F, Chen H, Shang L, Wang L, et al. (2008) A biofuel cell with enhanced performance by multilayer biocatalyst immobilized on highly ordered macroporous electrode. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 24: 329-333.
Concentric glucose/O2 biofuel cell. A Habrioux, G Merle, K Servat, K B Kokoh, C Innocent, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry. 622Habrioux A, Merle G, Servat K, Kokoh KB, Innocent C, et al. (2008) Concentric glucose/O2 biofuel cell. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 622: 97-102.
Structural studies of enzyme-based microfluidic biofuel cells. M Togo, A Takamura, T Asai, H Kaji, M Nishizawa, Journal of Power Sources. 178Togo M, Takamura A, Asai T, Kaji H, Nishizawa M (2008) Structural studies of enzyme-based microfluidic biofuel cells. Journal of Power Sources 178: 53-58.
Design of amperometric biosensors and biofuel cells by reconstruction of electrically contact enzyme electrodes. M Zayats, B Willner, I Willner, Electroanalysis. 6Zayats M, Willner B, Willner I (2008) Design of amperometric biosensors and biofuel cells by reconstruction of electrically contact enzyme electrodes. Electroanalysis 6: 583-601.
A highpower glucose/oxygen biofuel cell operating under quiescent conditions. H Sakai, T Nakagawa, Y Tokita, T Hatazawa, T Ikeda, Energy Environ Sci. In pressSakai H, Nakagawa T, Tokita Y, Hatazawa T, Ikeda T, et al. (2009) A high- power glucose/oxygen biofuel cell operating under quiescent conditions. Energy Environ Sci In press.
A four-electron O-electroreduction biocatalyst superior to platinum and biofuel cell operating at 0.88V. V Soukharev, N Mano, A Heller, J Am Chem Soc. 12627Soukharev V, Mano N, Heller A (2004) A four-electron O-electroreduction biocatalyst superior to platinum and biofuel cell operating at 0.88V. J Am Chem Soc 126(27): 8368-8369.
A 280 mW cm -2 biofuel cell operating at low glucose concentration. N Mano, Chem Commun. Mano N (2008) A 280 mW cm -2 biofuel cell operating at low glucose concentration. Chem Commun. pp 2221-2223.
Enzymatic biofuel cells for implantable and microscale devices. S C Barton, J Gallaway, P Atanassov, Chem Rev. 104Barton SC, Gallaway J, Atanassov P (2004) Enzymatic biofuel cells for implantable and microscale devices. Chem Rev 104: 4867-4886.
Irreversible and reversible deactivation of bilirubin oxydase by urate. H Shin, C Kang, A Heller, Electroanalysis. 196Shin H, Kang C, Heller A (2007) Irreversible and reversible deactivation of bilirubin oxydase by urate. Electroanalysis 19 (6): 638-643(2007).
Miniature Biofuel cells. A Heller, Phys Chem Chem Phys. 6Heller A (2004) Miniature Biofuel cells, Phys Chem Chem Phys 6: 209-216.
Enzyme-based biofuel cells. S D Minteer, B Y Liaw, M J Cooney, Curr Opin Biotechnol. 183Minteer SD, Liaw BY, Cooney MJ (2007) Enzyme-based biofuel cells. Curr Opin Biotechnol 18(3): 228-34.


971289:Mediatorless high-power glucose biofuel cells based on compressed carbon nanotube-enzyme electrodes


Supplementary

. Activity of laccase. (a) Spectra of a phosphate buffer (pH 7) containing 10 -5 mole L -1 ABTS 2+ , before and after addition of laccase (3 µg). (b) Evolution of ABTS 2+ absorbance with time at 339 nm after addition of laccase.

Supplementary Note 1: Inhibition studies of laccase by chloride

We investigated the inhibitory effect of chloride ions on the activity of laccase under physiological conditions. The chronoamperometric response of the biocathode was recorded at 0.2 V vs SCE with and without dioxygen (figure S1). After the repetitive addition of NaCl, the catalytic reduction current of O 2 decreases slowly for the concentrations of Clhigher than 0.05 mole L -1 . This decrease reaches about 5% of the initial value of the catalytic current for 0.15 mol L -1 Clwhich corresponds to the physiological conditions. Indeed, the concentrations of chloride and sodium ions in human serum are normally between 95 and 105 mM for chloride and between 135 and 145 mM for Na + .

Supplementary Note 2: The activity of free laccase at pH 7

The specific activity of laccase free in buffer (pH 7) was determined by using ABTS as substrate for the enzymatic reduction of dioxygen into water. The enzymatic oxidation of ABTS -2 into ABTS -. was monitored by UV-spectroscopy. The absorbance change of a phosphate buffer (pH 7, dioxygen saturated) containing 10 -5 M of ABTS -2 (ε max = 3.45x10 4 M -1 cm -1 ) was recorded as a function of time after addition of 3 µg of laccase ( figure S2.a). The slope of the absorbance intensity at 339 nm versus time (S2.b), indicates the velocity of the enzymatic consumption of ABTS -2 and hence reflects the activity of laccase. Taking into account that one unit of laccase activity is defined as the amount oxidizing 1 µmol substrate per min, the activity was calculated using the equations: d[ABTS]/dt = (d[Abs]/dt)/(ε.l) =X mol L -1 min -1 Activity = X.v.10 6 /m = Y µmol min -1 mg -1 = Y unit mg -1 ε is the extinction coefficient of ABTS 2-, l the path length, v the volume of the solution and m the amount of laccase in solution. The resulting activity of 1 U/mg at pH 7 is 20 times smaller than the activity of laccase at pH 4.

Supplementary Note 3: Activity of the entrapped and wired enzymes

The surface activity and the specific activity of the electrically wired enzymes immobilized in the CNT disks were calculated from the current densities measured at each bioelectrode using the following equation Surface activity (U cm -2 ) = J max x 60 / (F x n) Specific activity (U mg -1 ) = J max x 60 x A / (F x n x m) U is the enzyme activity in µmol min -1 ; n is the number of electrons involved in electrode reaction (n = 2 for glucose oxidation by GOx, n= 1 for ABTS 2oxidation by laccase); A is the electrode surface in cm 2 ; F is the Faraday constant, m is the mass of enzyme in mg. J max is the current density in A cm -2 . For the biocathode, the laccase activity was conventionally investigated via the one-electron oxidation of the co-substrate ABTS 2participating to the reduction of dioxygen. The surface activity and specific activity of the electrically connected laccase were thus estimated at 3.84 U cm -2 and 0.1 U mg -1 , respectively. If we consider the activity of laccase towards the dioxygen reduction (n= 4 for dioxygen reduction by laccase), the surface activity and specific activity were 0.96 U cm -2 and 25 mU mg -1 , respectively. For the bioanode, the surface activity and specific activity of the electrically wired GOx were estimated at 2.48 U cm -2 and 65 mU mg -1 , respectively.
