
Introduction

Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumor and the most common tumor in infants {{not_in_s2orc}}. The course of the disease is variable with some tumors regressing spontaneously and others progressing rapidly despite intense therapeutic intervention {{29654828}}. Current treatment includes chemotherapy, surgical resection, radiotherapy, stem cell transplantation, and immunotherapy {{8288651}}. While low-risk patients may be cured with surgery alone, patients with high-risk neuroblastoma have a poor prognosis despite this aggressive therapy {{8288651}}.
Neuroblastoma typically arises in the retroperitoneum from the adrenal glands and paravertebral sympathetic plexus. It is a highly vascular tumor that wraps around major abdominal vessels, developing extensive tumor neovasculature {{24135484}}{{not_in_s2orc}}. This suggests activation of angiogenic signaling pathways, many of which are regulated through receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling cascades. For example, the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) (PI3K/AKT/mTOR) pathway is a pro-survival signaling cascade that is aberrantly activated in neuroblastoma and activation correlates with a poor prognosis {{17205976}}. mTOR regulates cell growth and autophagy, and its activity in neuroblastoma cells has been shown to affect cell differentiation by coordinating macromolecule synthesis and degradation {{35592061}}. Targeted agents including monoclonal antibodies, small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors and serine-threonine kinase inhibitors can block this pathway at multiple regulatory nodes {{1911461}}. Indeed, therapeutics targeting PI3K/AKT/mTOR have shown efficacy in preclinical models of neuroblastoma {{11910305}} and may be a promising approach for patients with high-risk disease.
We previously developed an ultrasound guided, minimally invasive method for injecting neuroblastoma cell lines into the adrenal gland or para-adrenal space of immunocompromised mice {{4451342}}. This model was used to test a standard-ofcare induction chemotherapy regimen, which includes cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide with alternating courses of cisplatin and etoposide {{4451342}}. Tumor growth and response was monitored using ultrasound, MRI and bioluminescence imaging. 30% of the mice treated with induction chemotherapy demonstrated a clinical response with complete response (CR) or stable disease (SD). Animals with SD or CR could be differentiated by the 5th course. This was reminiscent of observations in clinical trials, which supported reduction of the number of cycles of intensive induction chemotherapy previously used for high-risk neuroblastoma {{32800959}}.
A major challenge in oncology research is the low success of translating preclinical results to effective outcomes in patients. This discrepancy can result from many different factors including the dose, schedule and combination of drugs used in preclinical testing, the method for monitoring and reporting tumor response and the relevance of the animal models used in preclinical trials. Orthotopic neuroblastoma xenografts have previously been shown to be more likely to develop distant metastasis compared to subcutaneous tumors {{30734719}}, and others have adopted similar techniques to create patient-derived xenografts that retained the major characteristics seen in the patient {{18132057}}. Indeed, {{18132057}} have shown that patient-derived neuroblastoma xenografts retain the genetic and histopathologic features of the patient tumor they were derived from. In this study, we report the development and characterization of an orthotopic neuroblastoma xenograft from a high-risk primary patient tumor. We performed comprehensive genomic characterization of the primary tumor and the xenograft. As shown previously {{18132057}}, our patient-derived neuroblastoma xenograft retained the genetic features of the primary tumor. To establish a baseline response, we tested standard of care induction chemotherapy {{46349809}} and compared those data to molecular targeted therapy directed at the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. We developed a double blind, randomized preclinical trial design along with an integrated database using OpenClinica for storing and sharing all preclinical data. Having validated the xenograft and establishing the value for preclinical testing, we then developed culture conditions for high throughput screening of the primary xenograft cells to identify novel therapeutics. This example serves as the foundation for a larger more comprehensive effort to establish and characterize orthotopic xenografts for pediatric solid tumors as a tool for translational research.

Results

Characterization of a high-risk primary neuroblastoma tumor sample

We have previously described a method for orthotopically implanting neuroblastoma cell lines into immunocompromised mice {{4451342}}. One disadvantage of using cell lines to model neuroblastoma in vivo is that they may undergo selection in culture and the genomic landscape may deviate from the primary patient tumor {{14511646}}. Therefore, to more accurately model neuroblastoma in preclinical models, we developed a biology protocol called Molecular Analysis of Solid Tumors (MAST) to obtain excess tumor from surgical resection or biopsy for orthotopic implantation in immunocompromised mice.
The first neuroblastoma orthotopic xenograft from the MAST protocol came from a 2 year old patient (SJNBL046_D) that originally presented with a history of intermittent fevers, abdominal distention, fatigue and a limp. Imaging revealed a large adrenal mass consistent with neuroblastoma. Urine catecholamines were elevated and there was evidence of metastatic lesions in the lymph nodes and bones. Biopsy confirmed neuroblastoma with MYCN amplification and unfavorable histology (INSS stage 4) ( Fig. 1A-C). The patient had a poor response to the first two courses of induction chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/etoposide alternating with cisplatin/etoposide. Therefore, the patient was switched to a cyclophosphamide/topotecan regimen. The tumor was resected after 2 cycles of these agents and a small specimen was dissociated, suspended in matrigel and injected into the para-adrenal space of NOD scid gamma (NSG) mice as described previously {{4451342}}. The patient tumor specimen used for orthotopic implantation had cellular features of neuroblastoma including expression of synaptophysin and chromogranin ( Fig. 1D-F) as well as abundant dense core vesicles in electron micrographs, which are a hallmark of catecholamine storage ( Fig. 1G and H).
We characterized the genomic landscape of the patient's tumor (SJNBL046_D) and germline by whole genome sequencing as described previously {{5599280}}. The genome of SJNBL046_D was typical of high-risk stage 4 MYCN amplified neuroblastoma ( Fig. 1I). Gene expression array analysis of SJNBL046_D and the xenografts derived from the patient tumor (see below) was similar to other MYCN amplified neuroblastomas (Fig.   1J).
Characterization of a neuroblastoma orthotopic xenograft

Six months after initial implantation into the para-adrenal space of NSG mice ( Fig. 2A-C), we identified a mass consistent with neuroblastoma, which was confirmed by ultrasound. The animal was euthanized and the primary tumor at the site of injection was removed (Fig.  2D). We also identified metastatic lesions in the liver with extensive infiltration (Fig. 2E). Histopathological and transmission electron microscopic analyses confirmed that the orthotopic xenograft (SJNBL046_X) had cellular features of the patient's tumor (SJNBL046_D) (Fig. 2F-J). The tumor cells on the liver were infiltrating and invading the normal liver tissue (Fig. 2K-M). The dissociated tumors were cryopreserved and also injected into an additional cohort of NSG mice to expand and propagate the xenograft. With subsequent passage, the tumors grew more rapidly (4-6 weeks) than the original diagnostic tumor.
In addition to the cellular and histological characterization, we also performed detailed molecular and genomic profiling of SJNBL046_X. SNP 6.0 analysis of the patient's germline DNA, diagnostic tumor (SJNBL046_D), primary and metastatic xenografts (SJNBL046_X) showed that they retained MYCN amplification and the other chromosomal lesions (chromosomes 1, 15 and 17) found in the diagnostic tumor (Fig. 3A). More importantly, SJNBL046_X did not acquire any additional large chromosomal gains or losses. Spectral karyotype analysis (SKY) confirmed these results and provided additional information on the chromosomal lesions (Fig. 3B). In particular, fragments of chromosome 17 that were gained in SJNBL046 were fused to chromosome 13 and 22. The gain on chromosome 1 was fused to chromosome 7 and portions of chromosome 7 and 15 were fused to chromosome 1. The MYCN amplification was a double minute as validated by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (Fig. 3C). A comparison of the gene expression array data of the diagnostic tumor (SJNBL046_D) and the orthotopic xenograft (SJNBL046_X) showed a correlation coefficient of 0.92 (Fig. 3D). The most significant upregulated genes in the xenograft were associated with cell cycle and the most downregulated genes were associated with extracellular matrix organization and cell adhesion (Supplemental information).
We also performed whole exome sequencing of the orthotopic xenograft and compared the exonic single nucleotide variations (SNVs) in the xenograft to those identified in the diagnostic tumor by whole genome sequencing {{5599280}}. We identified a series of missense and nonsense mutations in genes that arose in the xenograft and were not present in the diagnostic tumor ( Fig. 3E and Table S1) but very few were in known cancer genes or have been found to be recurrently mutated in neuroblastoma. We also performed DNA methylation analysis using the Illumina 450k beadplex platform on the diagnostic tumor, and the xenografts from the primary and metastatic sites. There was good agreement between the primary tumor and each xenograft with 93% and 91% correlation ( Fig. 3F and Table S2). There was 98% correlation between the two xenograft samples from the primary and metastatic sites ( Fig. 3F and Table S2).
Targeting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in SJNBL046_X

Neuroblastomas are highly vascular tumors that often wrap around major abdominal vessels. Activation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway frequently occurs in neuroblastoma and correlates with a poor prognosis {{17205976}}. mTOR is an important regulator of cell growth and autophagy, and its activity in neuroblastoma cells has been shown to impact cell differentiation by regulating the balance between macromolecule synthesis and degradation {{35592061}}. Moreover, preclinical studies have shown that small molecule inhibitors of this pathway can have an anti-angiogenic effect on neuroblastoma in vivo {{11910305}}. To establish a standardized procedure for preclinical testing of novel therapeutics, we developed an integrated database using OpenClinica. We performed a randomized, double blind study comparing standard of care chemotherapy and molecular targeted therapy for the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. For standard of care (SOC), the first course of chemotherapy was cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and etoposide (CAE) and the second course was etoposide and cisplatin (CE) (Supplemental information). Alternating CAE/CE treatments were repeated for a total of 4 courses over 12 weeks ( Fig. 4A and B). To target the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, we treated mice for 2 courses with SOC followed by OSI-906 with BEZ235 or OSI-906 with BKM120 on a dailyx5 schedule ( Fig. 4C and D). OSI-906 is a small molecule inhibitor of the IGFR1 receptor, BEZ235 is a small molecule inhibitor of PI3K and mTOR and BKM120 is a pan-PI3K inhibitor. The IGFR1 receptor signals through the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. All three drugs are currently in clinical development for cancer patients and we used plasma pharmacokinetics to achieve clinically relevant doses in mice (data not shown).
Initially, 120 mice received para-adrenal injections of 10 μl SJNBL_046X in matrigel (20,000 cells/μl). The mice were monitored weekly by ultrasound and when the tumor volume was 6-8 mm 3 , they were assigned a mouse medical record number (mMRN) and enrolled on study (Supplemental information). A total of 80 mice were enrolled on the study (20 per treatment group) and we used a randomized double blind preclinical trial design (Supplemental information). The mice were randomized to 4 treatment groups (placebo, SOC, OSI-906+BEZ235 and OSI-906+BKM120) and were treated for 4 courses (12 weeks) ( Fig. 4A-D). The tumor volume was measured every 3 weeks by ultrasound and animals were euthanized when tumor burden reached 20% of body weight. MRI was also used to validate the ultrasound volumetric data (Supplemental information). When the animals were euthanized at the end of study or due to progressive disease, the tumors were processed and embedded for histopathological analysis.
Survival times among the four groups showed significant differences using the log-rank test (p=0.001) or the Gehan-Wilcoxon test (p<0.001) and each of the 3 treatment arms were significantly different from the placebo group (Fig. 4E). However, pairwise comparison of the survival times between the treatment arms were not statistically significant (Supplemental information). The OSI-906+BKM120 treatment arm had greater mean and median survival time compared to all other treatment arms ( Fig. 4E and Supplemental information). We quantitated the rate of change in tumor volume by calculating the doubling time between two successive pairs of volumetric measurements using ultrasound ( Fig. 4F-K). In the SOC treatment arm, 23% of the tumors diminished in size, 7% remained stable and 70% showed slower growth compared to placebo (placebo: 4 ± 1 days vs. SOC: 16 ± 11 days, p<0.001). None of the tumors in the placebo group decreased in size or regressed during the study. There was no significant difference in growth doubling times among any of the treatment groups ( Fig. 4G-I).
To relate the tumor response across treatment arms to cellular mechanisms of each drug combination, we performed histopathological analysis of the tumors. From the 80 mice enrolled on study, there were 51 tumors available for analysis. For each tumor, 4 μm sections were cut to prepare 115 slides for each tissue block for a total of 5865 slides for this study. We used three sets of 5 serial slides per tumor with 200 μm between each set. Sequential slides in each set were stained with Ki67 to monitor proliferation, phospho-histone H3 to monitor M-phase, activated caspase 3 to monitor cell death, Mac2 to monitor macrophage infiltration and CD34 to monitor tumor vasculature (Fig. 5A). Each slide was digitally scanned and then linked to the individual mouse data in OpenClinica. An image processing pipeline was developed to quantitate proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, macrophage infiltration and necrosis in each of the 51 tumors (Supplemental information).
Our automated image processing pipeline was used to segment the tumor tissue scans and measure the area of viable tumor, ischemic necrosis, long standing necrosis, extracellular matrix/stroma/fat, tissue folds, liver, kidney, spleen, muscle and glass based on the texture and H&E staining properties (Fig. 5B-D and Supplemental information). The algorithm achieved greater than 95% accuracy per region in cross-validation tests (Supplemental information). SJNBL_046X is a fast growing tumor that outgrows its vasculature and has large areas of necrotic tissue in untreated mice. The viable-to-total-necrotic tissue ratio was significantly higher in the SOC and OSI-906+BEZ235 treatment groups (p<0.001) (Fig. 5E) and this is consistent with previous reports that apoptosis and necrosis are inversely correlated in rapidly growing tumors such as SJNBL_046X {{36689949}}. Both the SOC and OSI-906+BKM120 treatment arms showed increased levels of pH3 and Ki67 relative to placebo when normalized to the viable tumor area (Fig. 5E). In addition to inhibiting PI3K, it has been reported that BKM120 can induce G2/M-phase arrest {{5719406}}. Consistent with this observation, the pH3/Ki67 ratio was higher in OSI-906+BKM120 treated tumors compared to placebo or OSI-906+BEZ235 (Fig. 5F). The proportion of apoptotic cells (activated caspase 3 immunopositive) was significantly higher in the viable tumor regions for the OSI-906+BKM120 treatment arms compared to placebo (Fig. 5G). The other treatment arms did not reach statistical significance. It has been previously reported that targeting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in tumor models in vivo can have anti-angiogenic effects {{11910305}}{{19914362}}{{33676646}}. Consistent with these previous reports, the OSI-906+BEZ235 and OSI-906+BKM120 treatment arms showed significant reduction in CD34 immunostaining for tumor vasculature in the viable regions of the tumor (Fig. 5H). Finally, we analyzed macrophage infiltration in the viable and necrotic regions of the tumor. There was a significant reduction in macrophages in both viable and necrotic regions of tumors treated with OSI-906+BEZ235 and OSI-906+BKM120 (Fig. 5I).
High throughput screening of primary neuroblastoma xenograft

To determine if the human neuroblastoma orthotopic xenograft described here (SJNBL046_X) could be used for testing drug sensitivity, we developed a method for dissociating and plating tumor cells in 384 well plates. Briefly, the tumor is dissociated into a single cell suspension with trypsin and filtered through a cells strainer to remove debris (Fig. 6A, Day 0). The contaminating red blood cells are eliminated and the tumor cells are plated in 384 well dishes in matrigel. Once the matrigel polymerizes, the cells are overlaid with cell culture medium (Supplemental information) and placed in a cell culture incubator (Fig. 6A). Twenty four hours later drugs are added in triplicate dose response using a pin tool (Fig. 6A, Day 1). Seventy two hours later, cell titer glow is added to the plate and the ATP levels are quantitated on a plate reader (Fig. 6A, Day 4). Positive and negative control compounds are included in each experiment for data normalization. Validated data are then entered into a central database and curve fitting is performed to generate an EC 50 for each drug ( Fig. 6B and C). Overall, the SJNBL046_X cells are much less sensitive to chemotherapy than neuroblastoma cell lines. The most sensitive cell line analyzed in this study was IMR32 and SK-N-AS was the least sensitive. These data demonstrate the feasibility of performing high throughput drug screening with a primary orthotopic neuroblastoma xenograft.

Materials and methods

Mast protocol and patient samples

The study, Molecular Analysis of Solid Tumors (MAST), is a biology study at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital designed to prospectively characterize the molecular, cellular and genetic properties of primary and metastatic pediatric solid tumors. Additionally, if a participant agrees, it allows for the establishment of cell lines and xenograft models. Patients are eligible to participate if they have a solid malignancy and are less than or equal to 25 years old. The MAST protocol was approved by the institutional review board of St. Jude Children's Research Hospital and the parents of SJNB046 provided written informed consent in accordance with institutional and federal guidance.
Immunohistochemistry and TEM analysis

The formalin-fixed-paraffin-embedded block of the xenograft tissue was cut at 4μm sections and processed for immunohistochemistry using heat-induced epitope retrieval with ER1 for 20-30 min. Mouse monoclonal antibodies against synaptophysin (27G12; Leica Microsystems) and chromogranin A (LK2H10(3); Leica Microsystems) were applied at 1:200 dilution with 15-min incubation at room temperature using the Leica Bond (Leica Microsystems) staining platform and the Bond Refine Polymer detection kit.
WGS and WES

Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and SNP or gene expression profiling by array were performed as previously described {{4310223}}{{4397219}}. For WGS, paired-end sequencing was performed using the Illumina GAIIx or HighSeq platform with 100 bp read length. The WGS data are deposited at the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) with accession number EGAS00001000256. WGS mapping, coverage and quality assessment, single nucleotide variation (SNV)/indel detection, tier annotation for sequence mutations, prediction of deleterious effects of missense mutations, and identification of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) have been described previously {{4397219}} Structural variations (SVs) were analyzed using CREST and annotated as previously described {{5075655}}{{4397219}}. The reference human genome assembly NCBI Build 36 was used for mapping 5 samples (SJRHB001-005) and Build 37 was used for mapping other samples. Genomic coordinates for variations in samples mapped to Build 36 were lifted over to Build 37. Copy number variations (CNVs) were identified by evaluating the difference of read depth for each tumor and its matching normal using a novel algorithm, COpy Number SEgmentation by Regression Tree In Next-Gen sequencing (CONSERTING).
For whole exome sequencing (WES), DNA libraries were prepared from 1 μg of whole genome amplified (WGA) material from matched samples using the Illumnia TruSeq DNA library prep kit following the recommended manufacturer's protocol. Libraries were analyzed on an Agilent Bioanalyzer to inspect quality of each library construction. Germline and diagnostic library samples were independently pooled and applied for exome capture using the Illumina TruSeq Exome Enrichment kit as described by the manufacturer. Captured libraries were then clustered on the Illumina c-bot and were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform with 100 base pair end multiplexed reads at an equivalent of 3 samples per lane.
For enrichment and validation of the regions containing putative alterations, genomic coordinates of the putative WGS targets were used to order either Nimbelgen Seqcap EZ solution bait sets (Roche), or Nimblegen Seqcap 2.1M arrays (Roche). The library construction and target enrichment was performed per manufacturer's instructions (Roche) using repli-G (Qiagen) WGA DNA. Enriched targets were sequenced on the illumina platform using paired end 100 cycle sequencing. The resulting data was converted to FASTQ files using CASAVA 1.8.2 (Illumina), and mapped with BWA prior to pipeline analysis.
Putative SNVs from exon sequencing were validated by NGS amplicon sequencing. Briefly, primers were designed to genomic regions (hg19) flanking the SNV no closer than 100 base pairs to the detected SNV. PCR was performed using 20-30 ng of whole genome amplified (WGA) DNA from each patient sample. DNA from the tumor (diagnostic sample) and a matched germline sample were used for each primer set to confirm the presence of the SNV in the diagnostic sample. Standard PCR was performed in 25 μl reactions using Accuprime GC-rich DNA polymerase (Invitrogen) with the following parameters: 95 °C for 3 min, 35 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s, 65 °C for 30 s, 72 °C for 1 min followed by a 72 °C 10 min extension with cooling to 4 °C. All PCR amplicons were checked on a 2% E-gel (Invitrogen) to ensure single amplified products.
PCR amplified products were collected into diagnostic or germ-line pools and purified using a Qiagen PCR purification kit. One nanogram of pooled sample was treated for sequencing using the Nextera XT kit (Illumina) following the manufacturer's protocol. Samples were normalized and denatured prior to the MiSeq run using the 2 ×150 base pair run (version 1) reagent kit.
Gene expression array analysis

RNA from the primary tumor (SJNBL046_D) and xenograft (SJNBL046_X) were assayed with the Affymetrix HT HG-U133+ PM Array Plate (NIH GEO Platform GPL13158). The data was then RMA summarized {{2711621}} using Partek Genomics Suite 6.12 (St Louis, MO). Scatterplots, log2ratios and correlations were produced using STATA/MP 11.2 (College Station, TX). SJNB046_D/X data was joined by probeset sequence to 125 public human neuroblastoma microarrays analyzed as previously described {{4451342}}. After platform corrected the joined data set was visualized by principal component analysis (PCA) using Partek 6.6.
SNP 6.0 analysis

SJNBL046 germline, primary tumor, xenograft and metastasis sample DNA was assayed on GenomeWideSNP_6 Affymetrix arrays. The data was normalized and logratio and copy number were estimated using the Partek Genomics Suites 6.3 workflow. Data was then visualized in Spotfire DecisionSite.
Ultrasound guided para-adrenal injection

All ultrasound procedures were performed using the VEVO-770, fitted with a RMV-706 probe. Cells were suspended in Matrigel (BD Worldwide, Cat#354234) at a concentration of 2 ×10 4 cells per microliter and placed on ice. Anesthetized recipient CD1 nude mice (isoflurane 1.5% in O 2 delivered at 2 l/min) were placed laterally on the imaging bed such that the left flank faced upward. In order to provide a channel for delivery of the implant, a 22 gauge catheter (BD Worldwide, Cat#381423) was gently inserted through the skin and back muscle into the para-adrenal region and the hub was removed. A chilled Hamilton syringe fitted with a 27 gauge needle (1.5 in.) and loaded with 10 μl of the cell suspension was guided steretoactically through the catheter and positioned between the kidney and adrenal gland as visualized using ultrasound. The cells were injected into the region and the needle was left in place for 30 s to permit the matrigel component to set. The needle was then slowly removed, followed by gentle removal of the catheter.
Neuroblastoma xenograft dissociation and banking

Tumor was harvested from SJNB046_X tumor bearing NSG mice. Tumor was minced with sterile scalpels and rinsed in phosphate buffered saline without calcium or magnesium (PBS). Tumor suspension was transferred to a 50 ml conical tube and filled with PBS. Dissociation was done by adding 600 μl of trypsin (10 mg/ml, Sigma Cat#T9935) and the tube was incubated 37 °C for 10 min. Dissociation was stopped by adding 600 μl of Soybean Trypsin Inhibitor (10 mg/ml, Sigma Cat#T6522). Deoxyribonuclease I (2 mg/ml, Sigma Cat#D4513) and magnesium chloride (1 M) were added in equal amounts of 60 μL increments until tumor fragments easily settle at the bottom of the tube. The dissociated tumor cell suspension was filtered with a 40 μm cell strainer and then centrifuged at 450g (G=RCF) for 5 min. Supernatant was discarded and 10 ml of red blood cell lysis solution (5 Prime Cat#2301310) added and incubated at room temperature for 10 min. PBS with 10% FBS (Biowest Cat#SO1520) was added to fill 50 ml conical tube and cell suspension was centrifuged at 450g (G=RCF) for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded and the cell pellet was resuspended in PBS/10% FBS for counting.
SKY

After a 4 h colcemid incubation, cells from this sample were harvested using routine cytogenetic methods. A commercially prepared SKY probe from Applied Spectral Imaging (Carlsbad, CA) was used as the probe for this analysis. Applied Spectral Imaging protocols were followed for the hybridization and detection steps. Sixteen metaphase cells were analyzed which were determined to be male in origin. 69% of analyzed metaphase cells were found to have the following karyotype determined by SKY as 45,XY,t(1;7)(q?21;p? 13)der(1)t(1;15)(p?31;?),der(13)t(13;17)(p? 13;?),-17,der(22)t(17;22)(?;p?13),dmin(2). The remaining 31% of analyzed metaphase cells were found to have the following karyotype determined by SKY analysis as 46,XY,t(1;7)t(q?21;p? 13)der(1)t(1;15)(p? 31;?),der(13)t(13;17)(p?13;?),der(22)t(17;22) (?;p?13),dmin(2).

Supplementary Material

Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.     immunhistochemical staining for each treatment group at each course of treatment. Statistical analysis is presented in the Supplemental information. Representative ultrasound image and 3D reconstruction of a tumor with complete response (J) and progressive disease (K). {{not_in_s2orc}} Dev Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 24.
Fig. 5.

Histological analysis of SJNBL046_X tumors after treatment. (A) Drawing of the scheme used to sample the tumor tissue isolated from mice that came off of study. Three regions of tumor were processed separately and serial sections were collected to produce 3 distinct sets for each tumor. After staining, the slides were scanned and images were segmented and scored using the automated system described in the Supplemental information. (B) Representative H&E stained section of a SJNBL046_X tumor and the matched segmentation and automated scoring of the tissue for viable (red), ischemic necrotic (orange) and longstanding necrotic tissue (yellow). (C) Representative micrographs of immunohistochemical staining of a tumor from a mouse who received placebo and one that received BEZ-235+OSI-906. Arrows indicate immunopositive cells for each antibody. Scale bars: 50 μm. Abbreviations: Ki67 labels the nuclei of proliferating cells in any stage of the cell cycle. PH3 labels cells in S-phase. Casp3 labels cells undergoing cell death. CD34 labels vascular endothelial cells and MAC2 labels macrophages.  High-throughput screening of SJNBL046_X primary cultures. (A) Drawing of the scheme used for primary cultures of orthotopic xenografts in the screening platform. On day 0, the tumor is isolated and processed into a single cell suspension that is then plated into 384 well dishes. The next day (Day 1) the dishes are drugged in dose response in triplicate and then incubated for 72 h. Cell-titer glo is used to measure the level of ATP in the cultures as a proxy for the number of viable cells. (B) Representative dose response curves for some of the active drugs against neuroblastoma cell lines and the SJNBL046_X xenograft. (C) Heatmap of the entire drug library tested in this study. {{not_in_s2orc}} Dev Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 24.




CITED_PAPERS:


18132057:Neuroblastoma patient-derived orthotopic xenografts retain metastatic patterns and geno- and phenotypes of patient tumours


Materials and Methods

intensive treatment with chemotherapy, surgery and radiotherapy. 1,2 Relevant neuroblastoma animal models are thus needed to improve the understanding, and ultimately the treatment, of high-risk neuroblastoma.
In current human neuroblastoma xenograft mouse models, tumours have been established subcutaneously and by orthotopic injection of cell lines or short-term cultured primary cells. [3][4][5][6][7][8][9] Orthotopically growing tumours are more prone to form vascularised xenografts with increased frequency of spontaneous distant metastasis as compared to subcutaneous tumours. 5 It has become increasingly clear that tumour cells cultured in vitro can develop aberrant and irreversible genetic and phenotypic changes not consistent with the properties of the original patient tumour. 10 In addition, as shown here and previously reported, 5,11 cell line-derived orthotopic neuroblastoma xenografts often lack substantial spontaneous metastasis to bone marrow. Although results from cell line-derived studies have been valuable, generation of neuroblastoma patientderived xenografts (PDXs) by implantation of viable tumour explants from cancer patients is an alternative approach to better maintain patient-derived tumour cell features. 12 By implantation of intact patient tumour explants, including human tumour stroma, in vitro induced modifications are bypassed. PDXs have been established by subcutaneous implantation of patient-derived tumour explants from paediatric cancers, including neuroblastoma 13 and by implantation of neuroblastoma samples into human pluripotent stem cellderived experimental teratomas. 14 By subcutaneous and/or orthotopic implantation of diverse adult tumours (reviewed in Tentler et al. 10 ), PDX-based tumour models have been increasingly utilised for preclinical drug screening. For this purpose and for mechanistic studies of metastasis and treatment resistance, it would be important to establish orthotopic PDX models of neuroblastoma to faithfully resemble the clinical features of the disease. Establishment of PDXs from rare tumours, like neuroblastoma, is however challenging for investigators with only sporadic access to fresh tumour material. We approached this problem by implantation of viably cryopreserved neuroblastoma samples.
Here we present the establishment, in vivo imaging and detailed characterisation of neuroblastoma patient-derived orthotopic xenografts in immunodeficient mice. Neuroblastoma PDXs retain the undifferentiated histology, neuroblastoma protein marker profile and gene copy number changes of their corresponding patient tumours. PDX-derived cells were cultured as neurospheres where tumour cells expressed typical neuroblastoma gene markers and retained tumour-initiating and metastatic capacity in vivo. Importantly, PDXs exhibit extensive infiltrative growth into surrounding tissues and display widespread metastasis to distant organs, including bone marrow.

Cell culture

The human neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-BE(2)c was grown in Minimum Essential Medium at 37 C in 5% CO 2 , 21% O 2 and 95% air. The media was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 lg/ml of streptomycin. Media and supplements were obtained from Invitrogen Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA).

Processing of primary neuroblastoma explants

Primary neuroblastoma samples were obtained from neuroblastoma biopsy or surgery. Intact tumour explants (fragments of approximately 2 mm 3 2 mm 3 2 mm) were cryopreserved in 90% FBS and 10% dimethyl sulfoxide by stepwise cooling using CoolCell (BioCision, Larkspur, CA) and stored in 280 C freezer. Tumour explants were thawed either immediately prior to implantation into mice or one day prior to implantation and kept in stem cell media [Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's medium (DMEM)/F-12 medium with glutamine, 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 lg/ml of streptomycin, 2% B27 supplement, 40 ng/ml of basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 2 and 20 ng/ml of epidermal growth factor (EGF)] in incubator at 37 C in 5% CO 2 and 21% O 2 . The regional ethical review board at Lund University approved the study (Dnr. 2011/289) and written informed consent was obtained.

Animal procedures

Four-to six-week-old female or male NSG mice were purchased from Charles River (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA). Mice were housed under pathogen-free conditions and received autoclaved water and food. Mice were anaesthetised using 3% isofluorane inhalation. For the orthotopic adrenal gland injection, the skin and the mesentery membrane were cut and exposure of the left adrenal gland was achieved by displacement of the spleen. 5 3 10 5 SK-N-BE(2)c cells in 30 ml phosphate buffered saline were What's new? Neuroblastoma is a childhood tumour with heterogeneous characteristics and children with metastatic disease have a poor outcome. Here, the authors established neuroblastoma patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) by orthotopic implantation of viably cryopreserved or fresh tumour explants of patients with high-risk neuroblastoma into immunodeficient mice. The PDXs retained the genotype and phenotype of patient tumours and exhibited substantial infiltrative growth and metastasis to distant organs including bone marrow. PDX-derived neuroblastoma cells were expanded in vitro and retained tumourigenic and metastatic capacity in vivo. The PDXs may thus represent an important tool for investigating neuroblastoma growth and metastasis as well as drug targeting.
injected into the adrenal gland using a 29G syringe. Intact patient-derived tumour explants were incubated in matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose) for a minimum of 20 min, then placed on top of the adrenal gland and immediately covered with matrigel. PDX-derived cultured cells were injected either as dissociated single cells (1 3 10 6 cells) or as spheres (approximately 1 3 10 6 cells) into the adrenal gland of NSG mice (n 5 3; single cells and n 5 3; spheres). The mesentery membrane was sown back together and the skin was closed using surgical clips. Mice were sacrificed immediately when exhibiting symptoms of tumour growth. Primary tumour, liver, kidneys, lungs, femur and tibia were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for histopathological examination. Pieces of the primary tumour were snap frozen for genomic assays. All animal procedures followed the guidelines set by the Malm€ o-Lund Ethical Committee for the use of laboratory animals and were conducted in accordance with European Union directive on the subject of animal rights.

Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography imaging

FDG-PET scanning was performed to detect orthotopic tumours. The 18 F-FDG was produced and provided by Skåne University Hospital Cyclotron Unit. For PET-imaging, mice were intravenously injected with approximately 30 MBq of FDG and were imaged 1 h after administration using a preclinical PET/CT-scanner (Bioscan, USA). Mice were anaesthetised using 2-3% isofluorane and were placed in a temperature regulated animal chamber (Minerve, Bioscan, USA) with the temperature set to 37 C (Minerve multistation controller unit) during the scanning. During the acquisitions, respiration was monitored on PC (SA Instruments, Inc, USA) and anaesthesia levels were adjusted accordingly. CT scanning was performed using the X-ray exposure of 600 ms and 177 lA, and the zoom level set to medium zoom. The CT images were scanned with 180 projections/rotation, pitch 1.0 and a binning of 1:4. The CT reconstruction was performed utilizing a Butterworth filter algorithm. The PET acquisition was performed with the coincidence mode set 1-3. The PET data was acquired in list mode for 30 minutes, and reconstructed dynamically using the OSEM option and rebinning SSRB to 2D LOR with the ring difference set to 8. CT and PET images were evaluated and created using the InVivoScope software (InviCRO).

Magnetic resonance imaging

Mice were anaesthetised using 2-3% isofluorane in 200 ml/ min O 2 / 200 ml/min NO 2 . Animals were restrained to an MR bed via head fixation. Breathing was monitored using a pressure sensitive pillow, temperature was monitored using a rectal probe and heating was regulated during MRI data acquisition to keep body temperature at 37 C (SA instruments, Inc, USA). MRI was performed at a field strength of 9.4 T (Agilent Technologies, USA). Respiration triggered fat suppressed fast spin echo images were acquired using a spin echo preparation (10 ms) and an echo spacing of 10 ms (acceleration factor 4, effective echo time: 27 ms, 4 averages). The repetition time was set between 800 and 950 ms depending on the breathing rate of the animal. The acquisition of the data for the 12 slices was spread over 4 respiration phases to achieve a T1-weighting corresponding to a repetition time of about 3.2-3.5 sec. Coronal and sagittal sections were acquired with an in plane resolution of 1563137 lm and a slice thickness of 1 mm, while the transversal direction was acquired with an in plane resolution of 1373137 lm. ImageJ 1.46r with a plugin provided by Agilent to import their proprietary format FDF images was used to analyse the images.

Immunohistochemistry

Xenograft tumours and mice organs were formalin-fixed and bone specimens were decalcified in 10% EDTA (pH 8). Tumours and organs were routinely embedded in paraffin and 4 mm tissue sections were analysed. Haematoxylin & eosin (His-toLab Products AB, G€ oteborg, Sweden) was used for assessment of histopathology. A list of antibodies and their working dilutions are presented in Supporting information Table 1.

Microscopy and quantification

Images were acquired using Olympus BX51 light microscope with CCD Olympus DP50 camera along with the CellA Analysis Image Processing Program. Ki67 index was calculated by automatic quantification using the Image Pro-Plus software as described previously. 15 Neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) positive metastatic cells in liver, lungs and bone marrow were manually quantified in 1-2 entire tissue sections/mouse at 320 magnification.

Single nucleotide polymorphism analysis

Cultured SK-N-BE(2)c cells, fresh tumour explants from SK-N-BE(2)c orthotopic tumours, patient tumours and PDXs were snapfrozen and stored in 280 C freezer for single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array analysis. Briefly, DNA was extracted from the cells and tissues using DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the instructions. We used the Affymetrix CytoScan HD platform for SNP array analysis of cultured SK-N-BE(2)c cells, SK-N-BE(2)c tumours, PDXs and patient tumour #3. High resolution microarray analysis was performed by hybridisation of genomic DNA on arrays, using equipment and protocols as recommended by the manufacturer (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). The Affymetrix CytoScan HD chip contains approximately 2.6 million markers distributed throughout all chromosomes; of these almost 750,000 are SNPs enabling detection of copy number neutral loss of heterozygosity. The practical resolution of the method is 10-50 kb for deletions and 30-150 kb for duplications; depending on the probe density of each segment. HumanCytoSNP-12 DNA Analysis BeadChip (299,140 markers 10 kb average distance) from Illumina (Illumina, San Diego, CA) was used for SNP array analysis of patient tumour #1 and patient tumour #2. DNA amplification, tagging and hybridisation to the chip were performed according to the manufacturer's protocol (http:// www.illumina.com). Data were analysed using GenomeStudio Genotyping Module (Illumina). For exclusion of constitutional copy number polymorphisms, the Database of Genomic Variants (http://projects.tcaq.ca/variation) was used. Genomic position annotations were based on the hg19 build (http:// genome.ucsc.edu/) of the human genome sequence. Copy number variation analyses were performed using the Nexus software.

Isolation and in vitro sphere culture of PDX-derived cells

Small tumour pieces were mechanically dissected using sterile scalpels and the minced tissue was collected in a petri dish containing Accutase (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and incubated for 15-20 min at 37 C, with pipetting every 5 min to dissociate the tissue. The suspension was then transferred to serum-free DMEM/High Glucose (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA), excluding nondissociated pieces and centrifuged. The pellet was re-suspended in stem cell medium; DMEM/ GlutaMAX TM F-12 (mixed in a 3:1 ratio) supplemented with 100 IU/ml penicillin, 100 lg/ml streptomycin, 2% B-27 w/o vitamin A (Gibco-Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY), 40 ng/ml basic FGF (Promega, Madison, WI) and 20 ng/ml EGF (Gibco Life Technologies). Spheres were passaged once a week and cells from early passages (up to the fifth passage) were used for quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis. PDX-derived cultured cells were injected orthotopically into mice (described in Animal procedures).

Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction

Total RNA was extracted using either RNeasy Mini or Micro Kit together with the Qiashredder Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). An on-column DNAse treatment was included during the extraction. The following complementary DNA synthesis was performed using MultiScribe Reverse Transcriptase enzyme (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and random primers. Quantitative PCR was carried out in a 7300 Real-Time PCR (RT-PCR) System (Applied Biosystems) with SYBR Green PCR Master mix (Applied Biosystems). Comparative Ct method was used in order to quantify mRNA levels and three reference genes (SDHA, UBC, YWHAZ) were included to normalise gene-expression levels. Experiments were performed in triplicates. Primers are listed in Supporting information Table 2.

Results


In vivo imaging of orthotopic neuroblastoma PDXs

To optimise in vivo imaging techniques for observation of orthotopic neuroblastoma growth, we injected SK-N-BE(2)c neuroblastoma cells into the adrenal gland of NSG mice (n 5 9) and tumours were successfully established in all animals. After optimisation of fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) settings, orthotopic tumour growth was demonstrated as seen from the sagittal, coronal and transversal views. FDG signal was also seen in nontumour regions like brain, heart, kidneys and urinary bladder (Supporting information Fig. 1). For establishment of neuroblastoma PDXs, we implanted orthotopically fresh or viably cryopreserved tumour explants from six patient tumours into NSG mice. Patient characteristics are presented in Table 1. Orthotopic PDXs from three patient tumours were established and detected by in vivo imaging. FDG-PET demonstrated heterogeneous uptake of FDG within tumours as seen from the sagittal, coronal and transversal views (Fig. 1a). Orthotopic neuroblastoma PDX growth was confirmed by MRI (Fig. 1b).

Histopathological characterisation of orthotopic neuroblastoma PDXs

Neuroblastoma PDXs developed as large abdominal solid masses with heterogeneous gross morphology, including a haemorrhagic cut surface typical of neuroblastoma (Fig. 1c). The tumours displayed extensive infiltrative growth into surrounding tissues such as the ipsilateral kidney, muscle and fat/connective tissue. In contrast, orthotopic SK-N-BE(2)c tumours only displayed moderate infiltrative growth into surrounding tissues like muscle, pancreas and connective/fat tissue (Fig. 1c), and large parts of the tumours showed expansive growth pattern without obvious signs of infiltration.
Both PDXs and the original patient tumours were stromapoor tumours consisting of densely packed small round blue tumour cells with scant cytoplasm (Fig. 1d). The PDXs retained the differentiation status of their corresponding patient tumours (undifferentiated neuroblastoma for PDX #1 and #2 and poorly differentiated neuroblastoma for PDX #3). SK-N-BE(2)c orthotopic tumours revealed a uniform undifferentiated histology; small round blue tumour cells with scant cytoplasm and minimal neurofibrillary matrix (Fig. 1d).
Similar to high-stage neuroblastoma in patients, both PDXs and SK-N-BE(2)c tumours were highly proliferating as shown by expression of the cell-cycle marker Ki-67 in a large  (a and b). Uptake of FDG is also seen in the brain, heart and urinary bladder (a). The PDX is encircled with a yellow line and located above and below the ipsilateral kidney, encircled in red (b). Gross morphology of neuroblastoma PDX and SK-N-BE(2)c orthotopic tumour (c). PDXs (n 5 3) displayed extensive infiltrative growth into ipsilateral kidney, muscle and fat tissue while orthotopic SK-N-BE(2)c tumours (n 5 8) exhibited only moderate or no local infiltration (c). PDXs recapitulated the differentiation status of the corresponding patient tumours while SK-N-BE(2)c xenografts showed a uniform undifferentiated histology (d). Ki-67 expression in PDX #1, patient tumour #1 and SK-N-BE(2)c tumours. One section from each patient tumour and four sections from each PDX model were quantified for Ki-67 expression (e). The shown pictures are representative for the mice. Scale bar in C is 100 mm in (c), (d) and (e) and 50 mm in the close-ups of (d) and (e). fraction of tumour cells (Fig. 1e). The Ki-67 labelling index for SK-N-BE(2)c orthotopic tumours was 60%. The Ki-67 index was 74, 76 and 82% for patient tumours #1, #2 and #3, respectively, and 71 6 7%, 50 6 2% and 62 6 5% for the corresponding PDXs.

Expression of neuroblastoma protein markers

Immunohistochemistry revealed expression of NCAM (CD 56) in virtually all tumour cells in patients and the strong expression was retained in all PDXs. Chromogranin A (CHGA) and synaptophysin (SYP) were expressed in almost all tumour cells in patients and heterogeneous expression of these markers was retained in PDXs. Tumour expression of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) was heterogeneous in both patients and PDXs (Fig. 2). SK-N-BE(2)c orthotopic tumours revealed a more atypical differentiation marker profile, most notably very low number of CHGA and lack of SYP positive cells (Fig. 2).
Because previous in vitro culturing of neuroblastoma patient-derived tumour-initiating cells (TICs) resulted in overgrowth by EBV-transformed lymphoblasts, 16 EBNA2 expression in PDXs was investigated by immunohistochemistry. We found no evidence of EBNA2 expression in PDXs using EBV-transformed human lymphoblastoid cells as positive control (Supporting information Fig. 2a).

Patient-specific gene copy number changes are retained in neuroblastoma PDXs

Patient tumour #1 and PDX #1 presented with 1p deletion, MYCN amplification, 9p deletion and 17q gain (Fig. 3a). 1p deletion, MYCN amplification and 17q gain were also present in patient tumours #2 and #3 and retained in their corresponding PDXs (Figs. 3b and 3c). Thus, chromosomal aberrations typically found in neuroblastomas were retained in their corresponding PDXs.
SNP array profiling of SK-N-BE(2)c cell cultures has been performed previously. 17,18 Here, SK-N-BE(2)c cell cultures and three SK-N-BE(2)c orthotopic xenografts were analysed by SNP array. MYCN amplification, 1p deletion, 3p deletion and 11q copy number neutral imbalance were retained in orthotopic SK-N-BE(2)c xenografts (Supporting information Fig. 3).

Neuroblastoma PDXs exhibit widespread metastasis to distant organs

Neuroblastoma PDX metastases were demonstrated by immunohistochemistry. In liver, metastatic nodules at subcapsular as well as central locations were present in all PDXs, resembling the appearance and locations of neuroblastoma metastatic growth. Widespread micrometastases were found in the lungs and also, but less frequently, in the ipsilateral kidney (Fig. 4). Importantly, we found substantial metastatic spread to bone marrow in PDXs from all three patients. Bone marrow metastases homogenously expressed NCAM and metastatic tumour cells were dividing as demonstrated by Ki-67 expression (Fig. 4). SK-N-BE(2)c orthotopic tumours metastasised spontaneously to lungs and liver but to a much lesser extent as compared to PDXs (Fig. 4). We found no evidence of SK-N-BE(2)c metastatic cells in bone marrow. Supporting information Table 3 shows the number of metastatic cells in lungs, liver and bone marrow for PDXs (n 5 7-9 for each PDX model) and for SK-N-BE(2)c-carrying mice (n 5 8).
Neurosphere-cultured PDX-derived cells express neuroblastoma markers and retain tumourigenic and metastatic capacity in vivo PDX-derived tumour cells were cultured in serum-free, stem cell-promoting medium, where they formed free-floating neurosphere-like cell structures (Fig. 5a). These cultures were expanded for at least five passages and retained growth and phenotypic properties. RT-qPCR showed that these cultured PDX-derived cells overexpress MYCN (Fig. 5b) and neuroblastoma differentiation markers CHGA, TH, SYP and NPY (Fig. 5c). There was no EBV-specific mRNA expression in any of the PDX-derived cell cultures (Supporting information Fig. 2b). The expression of neuroblastoma gene markers and lack of EBV-specific mRNA expression confirmed the identity of the cultured PDX-derived cells as neuroblastoma cells. The tumour-initiating capacity of the cultured PDX-derived cells was tested by orthotopic injection of dissociated single cells or spheres and all injected animals (n 5 3; single cells, and n 5 3; spheres) showed tumour take. The tumours exhibited homogenous NCAM expression, heterogenous expression of CHGA and TH, and lacked SYP (Fig. 5d). Using NCAM immunohistochemistry, we found evidence of distant metastases in lungs, liver or bone marrow in all six animals (Fig. 5e). Thus, the in vivo tumourigenic and metastatic capacity of PDX-derived cells were retained after in vitro expansion and orthotopic injections.

Discussion

Here, we present a pipeline for preclinical modelling of metastatic human neuroblastoma using patient-derived tumour material without passaging the tumour cells in vitro. We show that it is possible to establish orthotopic neuroblastoma PDXs by implantation of fresh and, importantly, viably cryopreserved patient tumour samples, which overcomes the tissue shortageproblem when working with rare tumour forms. Using the clinical imaging modalities FDG-PET and MRI, we further show that orthotopic tumours within the abdominal cavity can be monitored. PDX tumours retained the clinical features of the disease such as the protein marker profile and prognostically significant chromosomal aberrations. Furthermore, PDXs were found to be robust models for invasive neuroblastoma with substantial metastatic spread to distant organs, including bone marrow. Lastly, we show that PDX-derived neuroblastoma cells can be established and passaged in vitro as spheres where they retained their proliferative capacity, neuroblastoma phenotype and tumour-initiating capacity in vivo.
The tumour model presented here is based on orthotopic implantation of tumour tissue on top of the adrenal gland as previous findings have shown that an orthotopic location promotes neuroblastoma growth and behaviour to a large extent mimicking clinical human neuroblastoma growth properties. 5 Thus, to monitor tumour growth, we had to use in vivo imaging techniques as abdominal tumours are difficult to detect in early phases and impossible to quantify in terms of tumour spread and tumour volume by using, e.g., calliper. Because tumours are established by implantation of explants we could not utilise imaging modalities that require pre-labelling of single cells for visualisation in vivo. However, as we show here, FDG-PET and MRI are powerful imaging techniques suitable for detection of orthotopic nonmodified neuroblastoma cells. While primary tumours were visualised in all tested tumourbearing mice, the next and more challenging step, will be to detect metastatic growth in the PDX models. A combination of FDG-PET or MIBG-SPECT, and MRI would probably optimise the conditions for detection of metastases in vivo.
The findings that neuroblastoma PDXs retained clinically important features of the disease make the PDXs more suitable as models for aggressive neuroblastoma as compared to the commonly used cell line-based xenografts. In the SK-N-BE(2)c cell model used here, several aberrant features not typical for the clinical disease were found, most importantly lack of bone marrow involvement. Indeed, one obstacle when studying neuroblastoma metastasis has been the scarcity of xenograft models that retain the metastatic pattern of the disease. 11 Here, we show that orthotopic neuroblastoma PDXs are reliable models for human neuroblastoma bone marrow metastasis. The presence of liver and lung metastasis in the PDX models are also consistent with the findings of liver and lung micrometastases in more than half of neuroblastoma patients analysed by immunohistochemistry postmortem. 19 Furthermore, we demonstrate that the neuroblastoma protein marker profile and neuroblastoma-associated chromosomal aberrations MYCN amplification, 1p deletion and gain of 17q were retained in PDXs.
Maintaining patient tumour explant viability is a critical parameter for successful establishment of PDXs and the workflow and/or transport of fresh tumour tissue from surgery to implantation into mice can potentially decrease tissue viability and reduce successful in vivo engraftment. Implantation of viably cryopreserved tumour explants can solve this problem as demonstrated here. Cryopreservation of tumour explants further allows for storage of viable primary tumour material in biobanks and can be used for establishment of many diverse PDXs at any lab with animal facilities. This is in particular important for establishment of rare tumours like neuroblastoma. Interestingly, previous studies have shown that the in vivo take rate of cryopreserved and fresh tumour tissue (pancreatic and colorectal carcinoma) is comparable 20,21 , although a large divergence in tumour take rates between different tumour forms and within a given tumour form can be anticipated. In the case of neuroblastoma it is likely that the tumour take rate drastically drops if low-stage neuroblastomas were implanted. Other parameters that could influence successful in vivo engraftment include tissue viabil-ity, time from biopsy to implantation, tumour type, mouse strain, implantation site and the use of co-factors like Matrigel. However, given the scarcity of aggressive neuroblastoma we have not had the possibility to test the effect of all these parameters for engraftment.
Orthotopic neuroblastoma PDXs will be important tools for in vivo drug testing against aggressive neuroblastoma. Although drug testing using subcutaneously implanted neuroblastoma xenografts 13 is less time-consuming, it appears, based on the results presented here and by others 5,10 that orthotopically established neuroblastoma PDXs is the model of choice for studying and targeting neuroblastoma invasion and metastasis in vivo. For such studies, neuroblastoma PDXs should optimally be used in conjunction with neuroblastoma transgenic mouse models with substantial metastatic capacity. 22,23 All established PDXs presented here contain MYCN amplifications and hence, the PDXs are also suitable models for targeting of MYCN in vivo. MYCN is an attractive therapeutic target for patients with high-risk neuroblastoma as MYCN amplification correlates with aggressive disease 24 and downregulation of MYCN expression results in decreased tumour cell proliferation, increased cell death and neuronal differentiation of neuroblastoma cells in vitro. 25 In addition to orthotopic neuroblastoma PDX models, zebrafish and transgenic mouse models, driven by MYCN alone or in combination with other oncogenes 22,[26][27][28] are important complementary preclinical neuroblastoma models.
In conclusion, we present a workflow for preclinical modelling of aggressive human neuroblastoma by FDG/PET and MRI imaging, histopathological examinations and genomic characterisation by use of orthotopic PDXs. Future work will need to expand the pool of neuroblastoma PDXs in order to reflect the large diversity of the disease. For instance up to now, we have only established tumours carrying MYCN amplifications. The PDXs serve as a source for in vivo expansion of patient-derived tumour-initiating cells, which will be valuable for in vitro studies. Furthermore, the recurrent findings of patient tumour-specific features, invasive growth and bone marrow metastasis in the PDX models demonstrate their suitability for mechanistic studies of human neuroblastoma growth and metastasis, and for drug testing against aggressive metastatic neuroblastoma in vivo.

Figure 1 .

1In vivo imaging and histopathological characterisation of neuroblastoma PDXs. FDG-PET/CT and MRI of neuroblastoma PDXs were performed 3-4 weeks after implantation. Orthotopic PDXs are depicted from the sagittal, coronal and transversal views

Figure 2 .

2Immunohistochemical expression of neuroblastoma markers in neuroblastoma PDXs. NCAM was retained in virtually all tumour cells and CHGA, TH and SYP were heterogenously expressed in PDXs. SK-N-BE(2)c orthotopic tumours exhibited very low numbers of CHGApositive cells and lacked SYP-positive cells. The shown pictures are representative for the mice. Scale bar is 100 mm in the overviews and 50 mm in the close-ups.

Figure 3 .

3Neuroblastoma PDXs retain patient tumour-specific chromosomal aberrations. Arrows indicate neuroblastoma-typical regions; such as 1p deletion, MYCN amplification, 9p deletion and 17q gain for patient tumours and their corresponding PDXs.

Figure 4 .

4Neuroblastoma PDXs exhibit wide-spread metastasis to distant organs including bone marrow. High numbers of NCAM-positive metastatic cells were found in lungs, liver, ipsilateral kidney and bone marrow of PDXs (7-9 sections from each PDX model). Bone marrow metastases were dividing as shown by Ki-67 expression (inserted field). In contrast, orthotopic SK-N-BE(2)c xenografts (n 5 8) exhibited only low numbers of metastatic cells in liver and lungs and no cells in bone marrow. The shown pictures are representative for the mice. Scale bar is 100 mm in PDX lung, liver and ipsilateral kidney, and 50 mm in the PDX bone marrow and SK-N-BE(2)c lung and liver.

Figure 5 .

5PDX-derived cultured cells express neuroblastoma markers and retain tumourigenic and metastatic capacity in vivo. PDX-derived cells were cultured in serum-free stem cell medium where they formed free-floating spheres (a). MYCN mRNA expression in negative control (the non-MYCN-amplified cell line SH-SY5Y), positive control (the MYCN-amplified cell line SK-N-BE(2)c) and in PDX-derived cells (b). CHGA, TH, SYP and NPY mRNA expression in PDX-derived cell cultures and SK-N-BE(2)c (c). Data are expressed as mean 6 SD. Tumours established by orthotopic injection of the PDX-derived cultured cells retained expression of NCAM, CHGA and TH (d). Metastases were found in lungs, liver and bone marrow as shown by NCAM immunohistochemistry (e). Scale bar is 100 mm in A and 50 mm in (d) and (e).

Table 1 .

1Patient tumour characteristicsNo 
Age 
Origin 
Stage 
Histology 
Patient genomics 
PDX 
Days 
Tissue status
1 
1y4m 
primary (AG) 
IV 
un NB 
MYCN amp, 1p-
yes 
70 
Cryopreserved
2 
2y2m 
cerebral met 
IV 
un NB 
MYCN amp, 1p-,117q 
yes 
102 
Cryopreserved
3 
2y9m 
primary (AG) 
III 
pd NB 
MYCN amp, 1p-, 117q 
yes 
59 
Fresh
4 
4y9m 
primary (AG) 
IV 
pd NB 
MYCN gain, 1p-, 11q-,117q 
no 
NA 
Cryopreserved
5 
2y4m 
primary (AG) 
IV 
pd NB 
1p-,117q 
no 
NA 
Cryopreserved
6 
12y 
primary 
IIb 
pd NB 
117q 
no 
NA 
Cryopreserved
AG 5 adrenal gland, un NB 5 undifferentiated neuroblastoma, pd NB 5 poorly differentiated neuroblastoma. Numbers of days refer to the time 
period from implantation until PDXs were analysed.
Neuroblastoma: developmental biology, cancer genomics and immunotherapy. N K Cheung, M A Dyer, Nat Rev Cancer. 13Cheung NK, Dyer MA. Neuroblastoma: develop- mental biology, cancer genomics and immuno- therapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2013;13:397-411.
Neuroblastoma. J M Maris, M D Hogarty, R Bagatell, Lancet. 369Maris JM, Hogarty MD, Bagatell R, et al. Neuro- blastoma. Lancet 2007;369:2106-20.
Functional sphere profiling reveals the complexity of neuroblastoma tumor-initiating cell model. A Coulon, M Flahaut, A Muhlethaler-Mottet, Neoplasia. 13Coulon A, Flahaut M, Muhlethaler-Mottet A, et al. Functional sphere profiling reveals the com- plexity of neuroblastoma tumor-initiating cell model. Neoplasia 2011;13:991-1004.
Neuroblastoma cells isolated from bone marrow metastases contain a naturally enriched tumorinitiating cell. L M Hansford, A E Mckee, L Zhang, Cancer Res. 67Hansford LM, McKee AE, Zhang L, et al. Neuro- blastoma cells isolated from bone marrow metas- tases contain a naturally enriched tumor- initiating cell. Cancer Res 2007;67:11234-43.
Biologically relevant orthotopic neuroblastoma xenograft models: primary adrenal tumor growth and spontaneous distant metastasis. C Khanna, J J Jaboin, E Drakos, In Vivo. 16Khanna C, Jaboin JJ, Drakos E, et al. Biologically relevant orthotopic neuroblastoma xenograft mod- els: primary adrenal tumor growth and spontane- ous distant metastasis. In Vivo 2002;16:77-85.
Preclinical models of pediatric solid tumours (neuroblastoma) and their use in drug discovery. D M Patterson, J M Shohet, E S Kim, Curr Protoc Pharmacol. 147Patterson DM, Shohet JM, Kim ES. Preclinical models of pediatric solid tumours (neuroblas- toma) and their use in drug discovery. Curr Pro- toc Pharmacol 2011;Chapter 14:Unit 14 7.
Preclinical models for neuroblastoma: establishing a baseline for treatment. T Teitz, J J Stanke, S Federico, PLoS One. 619133Teitz T, Stanke JJ, Federico S, et al. Preclinical models for neuroblastoma: establishing a baseline for treatment. PLoS One 2011;6:e19133.
Newlyderived neuroblastoma cell lines propagated in serum-free media recapitulate the genotype and phenotype of primary neuroblastoma tumours. L T Bate-Eya, M E Ebus, J Koster, Eur J Cancer. 50Bate-Eya LT, Ebus ME, Koster J, et al. Newly- derived neuroblastoma cell lines propagated in serum-free media recapitulate the genotype and phenotype of primary neuroblastoma tumours. Eur J Cancer 2014;50:628-37.
In vivo echographic evidence of tumoral vascularization and microenvironment interactions in metastatic orthotopic human neuroblastoma xenografts. J M Joseph, N Gross, N Lassau, Int J Cancer. 113Joseph JM, Gross N, Lassau N, et al. In vivo echographic evidence of tumoral vascularization and microenvironment interactions in metastatic orthotopic human neuroblastoma xenografts. Int J Cancer 2005;113:881-90.
Patientderived tumour xenografts as models for oncology drug development. J J Tentler, A C Tan, C D Weekes, Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 9Tentler JJ, Tan AC, Weekes CD, et al. Patient- derived tumour xenografts as models for oncol- ogy drug development. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2012; 9:338-50.
Pediatr Blood Cancer. E Bell, L Chen, V F Viprey, Meeting report: 3rd Neuroblastoma Research Symposium. Bell E, Chen L, Viprey VF, et al. Meeting report: 3rd Neuroblastoma Research Symposium, Liverpool, 6-7th November, 2013. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2014.
Patient-derived tumor xenografts: transforming clinical samples into mouse models. D Siolas, G J Hannon, Cancer Res. 73Siolas D, Hannon GJ. Patient-derived tumor xen- ografts: transforming clinical samples into mouse models. Cancer Res 2013;73:5315-9.
The pediatric preclinical testing program: description of models and early testing results. P J Houghton, C L Morton, C Tucker, Pediatr Blood Cancer. 49Houghton PJ, Morton CL, Tucker C, et al. The pediatric preclinical testing program: description of models and early testing results. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2007;49:928-40.
Tropism of the in situ growth from biopsies of childhood neuroectodermal tumours following transplantation into experimental teratoma. S Jamil, I Hultman, J Cedervall, Int J Cancer. 134Jamil S, Hultman I, Cedervall J, et al. Tropism of the in situ growth from biopsies of childhood neuroectodermal tumours following transplanta- tion into experimental teratoma. Int J Cancer 2014;134:1630-7.
Quantitative modeling of clinical, cellular, and extracellular matrix variables suggest prognostic indicators in cancer: a model in neuroblastoma. I Tadeo, M Piqueras, D Montaner, Pediatr Res. 75Tadeo I, Piqueras M, Montaner D, et al. Quanti- tative modeling of clinical, cellular, and extracel- lular matrix variables suggest prognostic indicators in cancer: a model in neuroblastoma. Pediatr Res 2014;75:302-14.
Tumorinitiating cells in childhood neuroblastoma-letter. S Mohlin, A Pietras, C Wigerup, Cancer Res. 72author reply 3Mohlin S, Pietras A, Wigerup C, et al. Tumor- initiating cells in childhood neuroblastoma-letter. Cancer Res 2012;72:821-2; author reply 3.
High-resolution analysis of allelic imbalance in neuroblastoma cell lines by single nucleotide polymorphism arrays. J Carr, N P Bown, M C Case, Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 172Carr J, Bown NP, Case MC, et al. High-resolu- tion analysis of allelic imbalance in neuroblas- toma cell lines by single nucleotide polymorphism arrays. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 2007;172:127-38.
Comprehensive SNP array study of frequently used neuroblastoma cell lines; copy neutral loss of heterozygosity is common in the cell lines but uncommon in primary tumours. H Kryh, H Caren, J Erichsen, BMC Genomics. 12443Kryh H, Caren H, Erichsen J, et al. Comprehen- sive SNP array study of frequently used neuro- blastoma cell lines; copy neutral loss of heterozygosity is common in the cell lines but uncommon in primary tumours. BMC Genomics 2011;12:443.
Metastatic patterns in childhood tumours. S Romansky, B Landing, Medical Publications. Weiss L, Gilbert HBostonPulmonary metastasisRomansky S, Landing B. Metastatic patterns in childhood tumours. In: Weiss L, Gilbert H, eds. Pulmonary metastasis. Boston: Medical Publica- tions, 1978. 114-7.
Cryopreservation of human colorectal carcinomas prior to xenografting. M Linnebacher, C Maletzki, C Ostwald, BMC Cancer. 10362Linnebacher M, Maletzki C, Ostwald C, et al. Cryopreservation of human colorectal carcino- mas prior to xenografting. BMC Cancer 2010; 10:362.
Successful xenografting of cryopreserved primary pancreatic cancers. C Sorio, A Bonora, S Orlandini, Virchows Arch. 438Sorio C, Bonora A, Orlandini S, et al. Successful xenografting of cryopreserved primary pancreatic cancers. Virchows Arch 2001;438:154-8.
Targeted expression of mutated ALK induces neuroblastoma in transgenic mice. L C Heukamp, T Thor, A Schramm, Sci Transl Med. 4Heukamp LC, Thor T, Schramm A, et al. Tar- geted expression of mutated ALK induces neuro- blastoma in transgenic mice. Sci Transl Med 2012;4:141ra91.
Th-MYCN mice with caspase-8 deficiency develop advanced neuroblastoma with bone marrow metastasis. T Teitz, M Inoue, M B Valentine, Cancer Res. 73Teitz T, Inoue M, Valentine MB, et al. Th- MYCN mice with caspase-8 deficiency develop advanced neuroblastoma with bone marrow metastasis. Cancer Res 2013;73:4086-97.
Neuroblastoma: biological insights into a clinical enigma. G M Brodeur, Nat Rev Cancer. 3Brodeur GM. Neuroblastoma: biological insights into a clinical enigma. Nat Rev Cancer 2003;3: 203-16.
The MYCN oncogene and differentiation in neuroblastoma. U K Westermark, M Wilhelm, A Frenzel, Semin Cancer Biol. 21Westermark UK, Wilhelm M, Frenzel A, et al. The MYCN oncogene and differentiation in neuroblas- toma. Semin Cancer Biol 2011;21:256-66.
Activated ALK collaborates with MYCN in neuroblastoma pathogenesis. S Zhu, J S Lee, F Guo, Cancer Cell. 21Zhu S, Lee JS, Guo F, et al. Activated ALK collab- orates with MYCN in neuroblastoma pathogene- sis. Cancer Cell 2012;21:362-73.
The ALK(F1174L) mutation potentiates the oncogenic activity of MYCN in neuroblastoma. T Berry, W Luther, N Bhatnagar, Cancer Cell. 22Berry T, Luther W, Bhatnagar N, et al. The ALK(F1174L) mutation potentiates the oncogenic activity of MYCN in neuroblastoma. Cancer Cell 2012;22:117-30.
Targeted expression of MYCN causes neuroblastoma in transgenic mice. W A Weiss, K Aldape, G Mohapatra, EMBO J. 16Weiss WA, Aldape K, Mohapatra G, et al. Tar- geted expression of MYCN causes neuroblas- toma in transgenic mice. EMBO J 1997;16: 2985-95.
