We found the corresponding counterparts of meron and elliptic solutions of Euclidean O(3) non-linear sigma model in the Pohlmeyer reduced version of the same theory, namely the sinh-Gordon equation. Summarizing, we may conclude the following: Instanton solutions, which are the only finite action solutions of the O(3) model, do not have a counterpart, as they are characterized by vanishing stress-energy tensor. Therefore, not every solution of the non-linear sigma model has a counterpart in the Pohlmeyer reduced theory. Especially solutions with a well defined topological number cannot be mapped to the Pohlmeyer reduced theory, as they have to be characterized by a unique limit at complex infinity, which is inconsistent with the form of the imposed Virasoro constraint in Pohlmeyer reduction.

All meron solutions correspond to the ground state of the sinh-Gordon equation. It seems that this is a more general property that singular configurations such as a meron have. In a similar manner, strings propagating into R t × S 2 are described by a non-linear sigma model that is reducible to the sine-Gordon equation. Classical string solutions that are singular in a similar sense (the world-sheet tends to an onedimensional manifold, such as a point particle solution, or the "hoop" string solution) have the property of being mapped to either the stable or the unstable vacuum of the sine-Gordon equation {{12750838}}.

Elliptic solutions, which can be viewed as solutions of an one-dimensional mechanical pendulum problem in the initial formulation of the theory, have also an onedimensional mechanical analogue with a hyperbolic cosine potential in the Pohlmeyer reduced description. For every periodic solution in the pendulum problem, there is a quasi-periodic solution and vice versa that has the same counterpart in the hyperbolic cosine problem. The above pair of solutions correspond to physically distinct solutions in the initial formulation of the sigma model. Furthermore, different, physically inequivalent solutions of the sigma model may correspond to the same solution in the Pohlmeyer reduced theory. This may be attributed to the fact that Pohlmeyer reduction deals with the fields and their derivatives in a symmetric way, as elements of a vector basis in an enhanced higher dimensional space, in our case R 3 .

It would be interesting to generalize these results studying the correspondence between solutions of non-linear sigma models with different target space geometries or in higher dimensional target spaces.

