Overall, the distributional similarity between the target word and the synonym candidates represents the strongest extension of the basic retranslation approach, and the cluster graphs do not provide further useful information. A breakdown of the cluster analyses revealed that the cluster sizes are very unevenly distributed. Typically, there is one very large cluster and several considerably smaller clusters, as shown by the first part of  Table 4: Distribution of candidates, synonyms and senses in the largest cluster vs. all other clusters in the iterations T 1 -T 5 .

proportion of candidates in the remaining clusters.

In addition, we found that most correct synonyms are also in the largest cluster (middle part of table 4). Accordingly, the cluster analyses do not represent partitions of the target verb senses, but most senses are in the largest cluster (bottom part of table 4).

Consequently, while the synonym features are useful for ranking the set of candidates, clusterlevel features are ineffective as they are derived from effectively meaningless cluster analyses. 4 While re-applying the clustering step gradually overcomes the uneven cluster distribution (iterations T 2 -T 5 in table 4), the sizes of the graphs decrease dramatically. For example (not depicted in table 4), on average there are only 169 candidates left in T 5 compared to 1,792 in T 1 , with an average of 2.8 correct synonyms instead of 22.5, and an average of 1.7 senses instead of 4.5.

We assume that partitioning the candidate set according to senses in combination with the cluster-level measures is a valid approach to deal with the word sense problem, but based on our analysis we conclude that either (i) the context vectors are not suitable to differentiate between senses, or that (ii) the clustering algorithm is inapt for this scenario. A possible solution might be to apply the algorithms suggested in {{11942888}}. Finally, no weighting was applied to any of the properties listed in table 2. This could be improved by using a held-out data development set, and a greater number of particle verbs (we only use 138) would probably be needed as well.

SummaryWe hypothesized that graph-based clustering properties in addition to synonym candidate properties should improve the precision of synonym identification and ranking, and extend the diversity of synonym senses. Unfortunately, our extensions failed, and analyses of cluster properties revealed that future work should improve the vector representations and compare other clustering algorithms. One should keep in mind, however, that we focused on a specifically challenging class of multi-word expressions: highly ambiguous German particle verbs.

