AssumptionsFor our result to hold, we must assume that the provers behave according to quantum mechanics. This is because we model the provers using the quantum formalism. Currently this appears to be a reasonable assumption since quantum mechanics has been a very successful theory. However, we run into a problem if we wish to use this result in certain circumstances. For example, we may wish to verify that quantum mechanics generates accurate predictions for very complex systems. In this case it becomes infeasible to classically compute predictions from the quantum model. Quantumly, this is still possible, and we might be tempted to use an interactive proof in order to verify that our quantum computer has done the computation correctly. However, if we use the arguments in this paper we run into a problem of circularity since we must assume that quantum mechanics is correct in order for the argument to go through, but quantum mechanics is exactly what we want to verify! Hence it remains an important open question whether it is possible to achieve interactive proofs for problems in BQP where the prover's actions are easy for quantum computers but for which we do not assume a priori that quantum mechanics holds.

Time-space trade-offsAs discussed in the proof of Theorem 1, there are space-time trade-offs. In particular we may perform the gap amplification by repeating in parallel or serially, or some mixture of the two. Hence we could perform N repetitions on n provers, each of which then performs N measurements, or we can repeat in parallel with nN provers, each of which performs a single measurement.

Another factor, which we have not mentioned, is the time required to build the necessary graph states. Graph states are built by applying CTRL-Z gates, one for each edge. At worst this can take no more than O(n 2 ) operations. For triangular cluster states, such as we use here, the degree of each vertex in bounded above by 6 so at most 3n 2-qubit operations are required (plus n single-qubit state preparations). These can be parallelized in a constant depth circuit by exploiting the localized structure of triangular cluster states. Regardless, the state preparation can be accomplished in a polynomial number of steps.

SimplicityOur construction has a somewhat remarkable property. Since triangular cluster states are universal, the state preparation depends only on the size of the calculation. By choosing a discrete set of operations (X, Z and X ± Z measurements are sufficient for universality) the quantum provers are also constant, requiring only the ability to measure in some fixed set of bases. The self-testing portion of the interactive proof then also only depends on the size of the calculation, since it depends only on the state and the measurements. Amazingly the classical verifier is also rather simple. It can be given a circuit as its input from which it reads off what gates to perform and simply looks up what angle to measure for that gate. The remaining calculations are simply XORs. This is a clear example of where the simplicity of the measurementbased quantum computing model allows for a simple analysis.

Another interesting property is that no single quantum prover has enough power to convince even itself whether the input is in the language. Indeed, all the quantum parts together, including the state preparation, still cannot perform even simple calculations since they can only prepare and measure some fixed state. They lack the capacity to perform the XORs required to perform a full measurement-based calculation. It is only when we combine the verifier, provers, and state preparation together that we obtain enough power to perform any substantial calculations.

X-Y plane measurementsIt should be possible, although a bit more involved, to use the usual graph state computation model {{8839192}}{{6197709}} involving X-Y plane measurements. There is a complication since it is possible to simulate a complex measurements M by using a M * measurements instead (i.e. complex conjugate everything). In other words, the provers could complex conjugate all their states and operators, and this would preserve the expected values of all operators. However, the complex conjugation cannot be "undone" through an isometry. Hence the complex conjugated provers would not satisfy equation (22).

As far as correctness of the calculation is concerned, complex conjugation poses no problem since the outcome of an adaptive measurement will be identical to the desired case. A workaround is possible through a suitable relaxation of (22), and details are given for the exact case in {{44939389}}. The remaining points are to make the techniques of {{44939389}} robust, and generalize to X-Y plane measurements, which can be done analogously to how X-Z plane measurements are handled here.

