Previously, genotype data from multiple mouse QTL datasets were successfully combined; if the QTL genes are the same, or close to each other with the same mode of inheritance and the same direction of the allele effect, the combined analysis results in higher LOD scores and narrower QTL. Using the same methodology, we combined HDL QTL datasets from two different species, the rat and mouse. Both combinations resulted in a successful increase in statistical significance and a narrowing of the QTL confidence interval. More importantly than the positional effects, however, this narrowing reduced the number of underlying candidate genes. The mouse QTL on Chr 11 was narrowed from a confidence interval spanning 41 cM to one spanning 17 cM, and the QTL on Chr 12 was reduced from 44 to 22 cM. The numbers of underlying candidate genes were reduced by 43 and 54 percent, respectively.

These results are the first report of a successful combination of QTL data from two different species. While the methodology involved in combining cross data was not novel, the steps required to prepare the datasets for combination were thoroughly researched and tested by us and may now be repeated. It is notable that in clarifying the steps required for aligning rat and mouse QTL at the marker level, several factors normally considered in QTL analysis were omitted for simplicity and for the value of testing by assumption. We designed the data combinations so that sex, diet or any other condition were cofactors only in addition to species, i.e., the datasets may have been from different species and different sexes, but one dataset never included both male and female mice. Diet significantly contributes to lipid metabolism, and the rats and mice from the different crosses were not fed identical diets or for the same time periods prior to phenotyping (see materials and methods), but its effects were not considered in this study. In implementing this procedure for actual positional cloning, a model with multiple cofactors should be used.

If QTL for the same trait are found in more than one species, it is common when narrowing the QTL to eliminate regions within the QTL that are not homologous to QTL regions for the same trait in the other species. This is especially true when the two species in comparison are extensively studied, as in humans and mice, or when the two species are very closely related, as among rodents. We recommend that in parallel or in conjunction with combining QTL data from multiple crosses within a species, combining QTL data from different species maybe be used along with all other QTL narrowing techniques, including cross-specific haplotyping and genome-wide association studies based on all strains. As previously suggested {{14076080}}, combining crosses complements the meta-analysis of QTL significance values.

Although rat and mouse are closely related rodents, this study represents a useful approach for combining data from other species, even from less related species, like mouse and human -if the species are extensively studied and if there is an appropriate arrangement of contiguous loci, as required in the selection of the datasets combined in this analysis. In attempting a mouse-human study, we would need to address the differences in overall metabolism in theoretical speculation as well as in data analysis. For example, in humans, females on average have higher HDL cholesterol than males, but in mice the opposite relationship is true. Such sex or other covariate differences in physiology are usually considered after one-species analyses are complete, when individual candidate genes are investigated. In combining QTL data within a species, we assume that allelic effects are parallel, which allows us to combine the data. A successful combination, i.e., the achievement of a higher LOD and narrower confidence interval, provides substantial evidence that the two QTL share the same underlying gene. We have shown that such success is possible with two closely related species, and because the rat and mouse are both closely related and physiologically similar, it is not a far stretch to draw the same conclusion. If the two species were different regarding HDL metabolism, as in mice and humans, narrowing the QTL by combined data analysis suggests the same underlying gene. However, because the physiological differences are not considered in the combined QTL analysis, any successful combination is based on a multi-dimensional assumption. The underlying differences in physiology are so complex in their polygenicity and dependent pathways that the data analysis would possibly need to coincide with physiological modeling. It may be possible to quantify metabolic differences between species based on such modeling and then standardize the phenotype prior to combining QTL data accordingly.

In addition to metabolic differences, genomic function at the level of recombination must be considered. In the analysis presented here, homologous QTL with an underlying contiguous sequence of loci were combined. Because differences in recombination rate between the rat and mouse were not taken into account during the analysis, a likely result is the skewing of the genetic map created in the context of the mouse. Recombination rates should be consulted as data from more divergent species are combined.

In summary, sex, diet, species, physiology and genomic differences are all factors to consider when analyzing combined QTL datasets.

In the examples we present, we use a simplified one-covariate model, encompassing all possible differences between the two datasets. Most importantly, we have described detailed methods for combining datasets from two different species. The successful combinations we achieved reveal a promising addition to the process of QTL narrowing. Had a combination not been successful, we would not have been able to declare that the individual QTL were species-specific as they could also be diet-, physiology-, sex-(in one case) or genome structure -specific. We recommend using a multi-covariate model when analyzing combined datasets for QTL-narrowing.

Advances in comparative genomics contribute greatly to the understanding of animal development and physiology. Incorporating such knowledge is essential for the construction of genomes, proteomes and metabolic networks, and for theorizing and elucidating the mechanisms of molecular and phenotypic evolution. Now, the near completion of entire genome homology maps, like the one available between the rat and mouse, allows for the ability to combine data in a way that is useful both intellectually and statistically. The methods introduced here recognize the decade-long explosion of empirical advancements and the resulting field of bioinformatics.

Beyond the alignment of homologous markers and genes, the integration of the QTL data for analysis adds a new level to species homology because theories of shared physiology may be tested mathematically. While statistical significance is both arbitrary and necessary for experimental validity, the increase in statistical significance (LOD) seen in these combinations is overshadowed by the potential insight gained into the underlying shared genome organization. The candidate genes underlie the QTL, but the replication and expression of those genes are dictated by the underlying DNA sequence and chromosome mechanics.  Rat-mouse concordance between cholesterol QTL on two different chromosomes. Genetic maps for rat chromosomes are shown on the left and for mouse chromosomes on the right. Rat markers names are shown in alignment with their genetic positions on the rat genome, and with their homologous positions on the mouse genome. The grey boxes show the original (pre-combination) QTL confidence interval for each species; the black bar represents the QTL peak. The LOD score for each QTL is shown adjacent to the peak. (A) Rat WxDA chr 6 male (most left) and female QTL are aligned with mouse BxD2 Chr 12 QTL. The most proximal rat marker (D6Pas1) is homologous to mouse Chr 17. The remaining markers align to mouse chromosome 12 contiguously. The female rat data was not chosen for this combination as the rat peak positions are not within the rat/mouse overlapping regions. (B) Rat WxDA Chr 10 female QTL is aligned with the mouse PxD2 Chr 11 female QTL. The region immediately surrounding the most distal rat marker, D10Mgh2, is not homologous to the mouse genome; the other markers align to mouse Chr 11 contiguously. Combining rat chromosome 6 data with mouse chromosome 12 data. All cM positions are with respect to mouse chromosome 12. Confidence intervals for the original and speciesadditive QTL are depicted by the black boxes; the box closest to the bottom represents the original 95% confidence interval in the mouse. The interactive and additive plots are indistinguishable, suggesting the QTL is caused by the same gene in both the rat and the mouse.  Combining rat chromosome 10 data with mouse chromosome 11 data. All cM positions are with respect to mouse chromosome 11. Confidence intervals for the original and speciesadditive QTL are depicted by the black boxes; the box closest to the bottom represents the original 95% confidence interval in the mouse. The interactive plot has a higher LOD than the additive plot, but not by a significant amount (ΔLOD = 0.8). Overall, the LOD score is increased and the QTL is substantially narrowed, suggesting that the underlying gene is shared between the rat and mouse.  Table 1 Peaks, confidence intervals, and LOD scores for the original mouse QTL, and for the additive and interactive QTL resulting from the combination of data from different species.

