We have found that growth of SC cells with cultured muscle cells resulted in markedly increased CAT activity. We have previously re-ported (4) that co-culture of SC and muscle cells did not increase either the number of identifiable neurons or the activity of several other enzymes. Indeed, the transmitter-related enzyme, GAD, was decreased under some conditions of co-culture. The increase in SC cell CAT activity was directly dependent on the muscle and SC cell density in culture, as well as the duration of coculture. We did not obtain a saturation of the response by increasing the quantity of muscle in co-culture with SC. Muscle CM also increased SC cell CAT activity by as much as 10-fold within 3 wk, while it did not affect the activity of GAD or acetylcholinesterase. The CAT activity increase produced by muscle CM was directly dependent upon the CM concentration and the interval of exposure. The factor(s) in muscle CM responsible for increasing the SC cell CAT activity was heat stable at 58~ and nondialyzable; membrane filtration data were consistent with the factor's having a molecular weight greater than 50,000 daltons. It seems reasonable to suppose that muscle grown in co-culture conditioned the medium as did muscle grown alone; and, thus, a substantial part of the increase in CAT activity observed in co-cultures was probably produced by mechanisms similar to those in the experiments with CM. It is valid to ask whether any additional factors are provided by the contiguity of SC cells and muscle in co-cultures. Physiologically effective synaptic interaction between nerve and muscle is not involved in the increased CAT activity in co-cultures, since the increase was not affected by the presence of c~-bungarotoxin. Our experiments provide no evidence for any effect on CAT activity requiring some other aspect of nervemuscle contact, but such an effect cannot be excluded as a basis for some component of the increase seen with nerve and muscle co-cultures.

The experiments with CM demonstrated that one or more macromolecules released by myogenic cells act to increase the CAT activity of SC cells. Several questions naturally arise with regard to this phenomenon. (a) Are myogenic cells the only source for the active molecules or can more than one tissue serve as a source? (b) Is CAT activity of the nerve cell culture affected in a relatively specific manner or is the effect a general one on culture growth? (c) Is the stimulation of CAT activity the effect of a single interaction between CM factor and recipient cell, or is it due to multiple small additive effects? (d) Does * SC cells were cultured alone in freshly prepared medium, in medium conditioned for 2-3 days by muscle cells, or co-cultured with muscle. Cultures were harvested at the end of the treatment intervals and the CAT activity was assayed independently in cells pooled from 2-4 dishes (35 mm) in Exp A (expressed as mean -+ SD) or from two 60mm culture dishes (Exp B). The increases in CAT activity were calculated as in Table I. :~ Differ from 3-13 at P > 0.02. w Differ from 3-13 at P > 0.001.

a similar regulatory interaction occur in vivo?

The present work provides some information with regard to the first two questions. We have found that medium conditioned by SC cells, differentiated skeletal muscle, and undifferentiated cells of myogenic origin increased CAT activity of SC cell cultures. Because of the differences between these cultures in cell type, size, and density, and because of the uncertainty as to the amount of effective protein secreted by the cultures into the medium during conditioning, it is difficult to assess the relative efficacy of the different cell cultures in the production of the CM factor. It seems clear, however, that skeletal muscle is not the only source of material that can produce an increase in CAT activity in SC cell cultures.

The co-culture and CM effects exhibited considerable specificity with regard to the enzyme changes produced in the SC cultures. In the experiment in Fig. 3, we assayed for protein, DNA, CAT, acetylcholinesterase, creatine phosphokinase, phosphoglucomutase, myokinase, and phosphorylase. Of these, only CAT activity was substantially increased, while in that experiment and some others, GAD activity was reduced in co-cultures (Figs. 4 and 6 and Table I). When SC cells were treated with muscle CM, CAT activity was substantially increased while the activities of GAD and acetylcholinesterase were not. It is this specificity in enzyme response of SC cells to coculture or treatment with CM which distinguishes the interaction reported here from a relatively nonspecific promotion of cell survival {{85966459}}. The data on enzyme activities, total culture DNA, and culture protein indicate neither a substantial nonspecific increase in plating efficiency with coculture nor a facilitation of long-term survival with CM. The specific increase in CAT activity produced by both of these conditions indicates either that survival of a population of CAT-producing cells is selectively increased or that cell survival is unchanged and CAT production per cell is increased. Some combination of these processes might of course occur. The fact that CAT activity in co-culture continued to increase well after the activity in control cultures had become constant (Fig. 3 and Reference 4), argues against an increased survival in co-culture of a population of neurons in which the CAT activity increased at the same rate as that of surviving control cells. We previously reported that differences in the number of identifiable neuron-like cells were not detected between cultures of SC cells grown alone and SC grown with muscle, while 20-fold more CAT activity was present in the co-cultures (4). Thus, our results suggest that the increase in CAT activity that occurred in co-GILLER El' AL. Choline Acetyltransferase Activity of Spinal Cord Cell Cultures cultures resulted from an increase in the net production of this enzyme per cell. Until the cell of origin of the CAT activity is established, however, other mechanisms cannot be excluded. The specificity of the effect of both co-culture and CM on CAT activity suggests some relevance to trophic interactions in the neuromuscular or other cholinergic systems. Since this enzyme mediates the synthesis of acetylcholine at the synaptic junction between spinal motoneurons and skeletal muscle, the interaction in culture may reflect a significant neuromuscular regulatory process. The nature of the regulatory material(s) and its mechanism of action merit further investigation.

