During evolution, regulatory instructions or information were encoded in the DNA sequence. Redundant coding (or correlated coding) is utilised to ensure that the important regulatory information will be inherited and transferred correctly. During the binding Table 2 Average performance of the artificial sequence data set (r = 3), perf = (kz∩P)/(K∪P), where K is the set of known motif sites and P is the set of predicted motif sites {{15514943}}  process, the transcription factor reads the regulatory instructions from the TFBS and subsequently guides transcription according to the regulatory information. In other words, the factor reading the special regulatory instruction from the TFBS then instructs the transcription according to the regulatory information obtained from the TFBS. Nucleic acids needed to be coded in a redundant manner to ensure that the regulatory information can be transferred correctly, and therefore these sites are not independent of the others.

Figure 7A typical TI spectrum of the artificial regulatory region harbours unidentified pseudo-TFBSs. The TI spectrum is on the bottom, and the TI of the complementary side is on the right. In this figure, the horizontal axis indicates the centre of the input sub-sequence with length that equals the aligned TFBSs of the specific factor. The data shows two embedded pseudo-gal4 TFBSs in the sequence. We can see that there are two TI peaks that are distinct but do not reach the threshold. With our model, for the sequences encoding motifs, such as TFBSs, the input sequences can be scanned, and the sub-sequences for which the TI is greater than the MTI of the motif can be taken as the predictive hits.

In our observations, most of the real TFBSs had a positive correlations because with the positively correlated coding, the information that they contained decreased accordingly, but the information was transferred correctly.

Interestingly, we find that if there is a real TFBS encoded by one strand, then there often are peaks on both strands, but the peaks on the opposite strand are usually lower. We think this phenomenon happens for two reasons: first, certain factors bind to their TFBS by inserting a domain into the DNA grooves. In this case, both strands of DNA could have physical contact with the transcription factor; hence, both sides could transfer the regulatory information to the factor, which is detected by our method. Second, it is not known from which strand the background noise comes. Therefore, for example, for r = 2, the occurrence probability of AG equals TC. Therefore, the complementary strand of a real TFBS can have a high TI.

Furthermore, this information transmission model has the potential to be useful in other research areas, for example, in the computational identification of other motifs.

