Findings from this pilot study demonstrate that both control and MBM groups had statistically significant increases in stress levels during the course of the first year of medical school. It can be noted that the control, non-MBM group had PSS levels elevated to 'high stress' levels (!20), while the MBM group remained elevated but did not exceed that threshold considered 'high stress'. However, the differences between the two post-tests were not statistically significant. Nevertheless, perceived stress levels were elevated among medical students regardless of participation in MBM.

The results reinforce the notion of an inverse relationship between increased stress and decreased empathy during medical training. We found that while stress increased significantly between pre-and post-test analysis for both MBM and non-MBM groups, empathy decreased significantly in the same time period for both groups {{5632524}}.

Participation in the MBM course did not appear to alter the course of elevation in perceived stress and reduction in empathy. However, a difference was noted in the median depression scores. In the control group (non-MBM), median depression scores rose significantly, but did not change in the MBM group, suggesting a potential protective effect of an MBM course. It should be noted, however, that while the change was statistically significant, the PHQ scores in both groups were not in range of clinical depression.

The purpose of our study was to determine if a classroom intervention in the form of an MBM course might have an impact on stress, depression, and empathy. While we hypothesized that participation in the course might enable students to manage their stress better and boost their empathy, the findings of the small study failed to demonstrate those outcomes, perhaps related to the small sample size.

A major limitation of the study was the low rate of subject response. As a result of this, we were only able to analyze data on 20 subjects. As such, our study's power was 0.255 (after accounting for multiple comparisons). A further study with a higher sample size is hence needed to establish a statistical effect. Other limitations include non-uniformity of MBM courses offered throughout the country, making the results of the MBM course conducted at Georgetown University difficult to generalize to courses offered throughout the country. Perhaps MBM courses at Georgetown University are particularly adept to protective effects of depression and less impactful on stress and depression. Clearly, this pilot needs to be repeated with a larger sample over multiple years. Indeed, this study was conducted over the course of 1 year Á the first year of medical school. It is important to follow students over the course of the 4-year curriculum and ideally compare students and programs at different institutions.

