Everolimus, a proliferation signal inhibitor, prevents allograft rejection in rodent and nonhuman primate models of allotransplantation. It exerts its immunosuppressive effect by inhibiting the proliferation and thus clonal expansion of antigen-activated T cells which is driven by T cell specific interleukins. Everolimus inhibits an intracellular signalling pathway which is triggered upon binding of these T cell growth factors to their respective receptors and which normally leads to cell proliferation. Its application in human transplantation has been already described; among its adverse effects arterial graft thrombosis has been reported in renal transplants within the first month of transplantation. In the phase III, randomised, controlled, open-label study (H2304) {{18859011}}, reduced tacrolimus exposure and everolimus were administered to HCV positive and HCV negative patients starting approximately 4 weeks after transplantation,  investigated versus standard tacrolimus exposure. A third arm in study H2304 with complete withdrawal of tacrolimus at 4 months after transplantation was terminated early because it has been associated with an increased risk of acute rejections. In the 12-month analysis, the incidence of the composite endpoint (biopsy proven acute rejection, graft loss, or death) was lower in everolimus + reduced tacrolimus arm compared to the tacrolimus control arm. The reduction in glomerular filtration rate was less substantial at 12 months and at 24 months. We decided to introduce everolimus in the patient immunosuppressive treatment in relation to the acute postoperative renal insufficiency, thus minimizing anticalcineurin renal damage. Impaired wound healing, thrombotic microangiopathy, vascular leakage, and intraabdominal collections, especially lymphocele, have been described as adverse effects of everolimus treatment. In this case it is difficult to relate the two abdominal collections that appeared in the postoperative period to the use of everolimus because of the multiple operations and the intraand postoperative complications. In conclusion we present the case of early introduction of everolimus treatment in the setting of a difficult liver transplantation that was not associated with arterial thrombosis, vascular leakage, wound healing alteration, and microangiopathy.

