In this article we present a general wavelet-based approach to functional mixture regression which is appropriate to use when modeling the association between a continuous scalar response and a functional predictor where the association is not homogeneous across the population. We provide a fitting algorithm and demonstrate some properties of the corresponding estimators using simulations. When compared with a functional principal components-based approach to functional mixture regression, evidence suggests that our method performs bet-  Figure 9: Top panels: estimated coefficient functionsω 1 (left) andω 2 (right) of the two groups determined by the WB functional mixture regression approach. Bottom panels: FAP curves for MS subjects that correspond toω 1 (left) and for those that correspond toω 2 (right). Another factor that plays an important role in the performance of our method is tuning parameter selection. We looked at two criteria for selecting tuning parameters: minimizing the 5-fold cross-validated predictive loss and minimizing a modified BIC value. We found that both methods were generally comparable with the BIC method perhaps slightly underperforming with respect to predictive loss. However, simulations showed that BIC tended to select the correct number of components more often and 5-fold cross-validation tended to overfit.

We noted in Section 2.3 that it is common to relate the amount of penalty on the covariates to the sample size as is done in (2.7) by including π r in the penalty function.

In their 1 -penalized mixture approach, {{52062868}} suggest including an additional tuning parameter, γ, in the form of an exponent on the mixing probability π r . They consider using only the values of γ ∈ {0, 1/2, 1}. They suggest using the value of 0 when the true mixing proportions are not very different from each other and using 1/2 or 1 when the mixing proportions are unbalanced. Our method corresponds to the case where γ = 1. In other simulations (not presented here) we compared models that resulted from using different values of γ in both balanced and unbalanced settings but generally saw little difference with respect to predictive loss when using different values for γ.

The ability to conduct inference on the estimated component coefficient functions is of critical importance. Future work will focus on developing methods for constructing confidence bands for the the true component coefficient functions. Subsequent work will also focus on extending the model presented here to incorporate additional scalar covariates and implementing fitting algorithms that allow for 2-and 3-dimensional images as predictors.

