Results presented below although still partial confirm the hypothesis that TRUS image delineation often underestimates prostate volume due to poor readability of apex and base slices and that it results in overestimating the dose delivered to the patient.

We observed that volume difference for those 8 patients was smaller than for the 11 patients having been included in the first evaluation. On average this volume difference was 15.86% for the 11 first patients instead of 6.79% for the 8 patients included in this work. Since the protocols were slightly different this does not allow a too direct comparison of numbers. Meanwhile, those differences may be explained partly by a side effect of this study having probably resulted in a learning curve associated to prostate TRUS delineation; indeed when the work on MRI/TRUS fusion began, the implantation team (urologist, radiation oncologist and radiophysicist) had still a rather low experience of prostate brachytherapy -implantations began in July 2001. We suppose that post-processing of data and comparison of US data to MRI ones increased the level of knowledge of the urologist who delineates the prostate on the TRUS images.

From the dosimetry point of view experiments confirm that the almost systematic underestimation of prostate volume results in a significant decrease of dose delivered to the prostate. However, prostate dose constraints are still verified on MRI+US contours for those 8 patients. This has to be confirmed on a larger number of patients since some preliminary evaluation exhibited cases where the D90 was substantially lower than expected (see {{128063}}). This has also to be confirmed on organs at risk but this requires software modification which is in progress.

The overestimation of delivered dose has probably a limited effect in terms of treatment quality and therapeutic effects. Nevertheless the implantation team is very enthusiastic about using this system since they expect an improved comfort for image processing and an increased confidence in the planning.

One can see on figure 7 another use of the system where isodoses corresponding to planning from the TRUS images are mapped to the MRI data. The visual validation of those isodoses from MRI data is apparently much easier than the direct evaluation from TRUS images since anatomical substructures are more visible on MRI than on TRUS data. This point has not yet been tested extensively but clinicians and physicists reacted very positively to such a possibility. One prospective development of this project could be to perform the planning directly on MRI data and to transfer this planning to the OR thanks to MRI/TRUS data fusion.

