The single implanted GBFC that we describe produces the highest output characteristics obtained for a GBFC inside the body of a mammal. One of the principal challenges for the development of an implantable electrochemical energy converter is the biocompatibility, which we achieved by enclosing the GBFC in a DacronH bag. Moreover, our use of porous dialysis membranes inside the DacronH bag not only prevents the external leakage of bioelectrode components (CNTs and enzymes) from the GBFC, but also prevents inward diffusion from the body fluids of biological macromolecules which can inhibit the activity of the enzymes.

The GBFC reported here produced a greater power output compared to our first report of an implanted GBFC operating with redox mediators {{14887567}} . In the current GBFC, the use of direct electron transfer between enzymes and electrodes led to a 20-fold increase in power density and an average OCV of 0.57 V obtained with a single GBFC. However, the in vivo performance was lower than that observed during the in vitro experiment {{971289}} . This was probably due to the dioxygen concentration in extracellular fluids (which is below 4.5 3 10 25 mol L 21 at the venous level) being about four times lower than in the air-saturated buffer solutions that were used for the in vitro   experiments. All power consuming electrochemical tests of the implanted biofuel cells were tested 6-8 days after surgery and the maximum OCV was measured daily until the power loss of the GBFC. After autopsy of the rats and recovery of the implant, the observed power loss was in most cases due to the dislocation of the wires from the bioelectrodes and sometimes occurred because the rat dislodged the external connector used for the GBFC measurements. In order not to harm the rat, the electrical wires used to connect the cell to the external connector were very flexible and very thin. As a consequence, after about 9 days, we were faced with mechanical breakage of free wires or wire breakage and hence disconnection at the level of the bioelectrode. It is important to note that, unlike all previous experiences made by other research groups with insects, molluscs or lobsters, the animal is not immobilized or anesthetized but remains always freely moving. A clear statement about the lifetime of our biofuel cells is therefore not possible until those engineering issues are resolved.

The obtained power density of our implanted GBFC represents a promising solution to several issues for electronic medical devices. Compared to our previous results {{14887567}} , the volumetric power characteristics represent an 7-fold increase in performance (161 mW mL 21 vs 24.4 mW mL 21 ) for a single implanted GBFC inside the body of a mammal, with an excellent biocompatibility ensured by the DacronH bag. The GBFC that we report produces significant levels of energy at a single location and hence could be utilized as the power source for implanted sensor devices dedicated to medical monitoring. Further optimization of our GBFC could be expected to provide opportunities for other medical applications such as Multiple-lead Cardiac Resynchronisation Therapy (promising for some types of Heart Failures), or peripheral nerve stimulations (e.g. for pain control). In the case of peripheral nerve stimulation several small GBFCs could be used instead of the currently implanted bundle of wires from a single sealed battery. Chemicals. Commercial thin Multi-walled Carbon Nanotubes (9.5 nm diameter, purity . 95%) obtained from Nanocyl were used as received without any purification step. Glucose oxidase (GOx) from Aspergillus niger (100 U mg 21 solid), laccase from Trametes versicolor (20 U mg 21 solid) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. Cellulose membranes were purchased from Spectrumlabs: Spectra/PorH Dialysis membrane, MWCO 6-8000 g mol 21 , flat width 32 mm, diameter 20.4 mm, vol/length 3.3 mL/cm.

