In this study, we describe the detailed characterization of a patient derived orthotopic xenograft of a high risk pediatric neuroblastoma tumor. This is one example of a broader collection of more than 50 orthotopic xenografts of pediatric solid tumors that are made available to the research community free of charge through the childhood solid tumor network (CSTN). Not only are these preclinical models of pediatric cancer useful for studying the basic biology of their respective diseases, but they can be used for preclinical testing and high-throughput drug screening of primary cultures derived from the xenografts. Moreover, they provide a well-validated and renewable source of cells for future epigenetic and proteomic studies that are difficult to carry out on primary patient tumors.

Orthotopic xenografts preserve features of primary tumorMany key features of the high-risk neuroblastoma sample described here in the patient tumor were preserved in the orthotopic xenograft. The histopathological features of the patient tumor were preserved in the xenograft with robust expression of antigens typically found in neuroblastoma including synaptophysin and chromogranin. Importantly, key subcellular features of neuroblastoma tumors including dense core vesicles were found in the primary patient tumor and the xenograft. The gene expression profile and DNA methylation profile of the xenograft were similar to the patient's primary tumor. The differences that were observed were associated with normal cells found within the tumor such as macrophages and vascular endothelial cells. The xenografted tumor does have vasculature and infiltration of macrophages but those are contributed by the mouse and are therefore not detected in the human array platforms. As in the patient, the xenografted tumor was aggressive with metastasis to the liver, spleen, lymph nodes and other sites in over 70% of mice. While some of the metastatic lesions could have been the result of seeding associated with ultrasound guided para-adrenal injections, the cells in lymph node and lung were likely the result of dissemination from the primary tumor. Also, even in the liver, the cells infiltrated into the tissue suggesting that they retained the ability to disrupt the cell-cell junctions and invade normal organs associated with neuroblastoma metastasis. One notable exception for metastasis was the bone marrow, which is a common site of metastasis in human neuroblastoma. The xenografted tumors did not metastasis as efficiently to the bone marrow as noted in other orthotopic neuroblastoma xenografts {{18132057}}. It is possible that the immunocompromised status of these mice prevents the tumors from metastasizing to the bone marrow because the microenvironment is altered. Future studies with humanized mice will be useful to test this hypothesis.

Exome sequencing identified a series of SNVs that were unique to the xenograft. They were not present in the whole genome sequence data from the original patient's tumor. It is possible that they were from a minor clone in a distinct region of the primary patient tumor that had a growth advantage in the xenograft or that they were acquired in the xenograft with passage. It is not known if those SNVs contribute to tumor progression or if they are simply passenger mutations. At the chromosomal level, there were no significant changes in copy number variations, structural variations or aneuploidy in the xenograft compared to the primary tumor. These data show the value of comprehensive molecular, cellular and genetic characterization of orthotopic xenografts to ensure that they faithfully recapitulate the patient tumor. All of the tumors described in the companion paper titled "The Childhood Solid Tumor Network: A New Resource for the Developmental Biology and Oncology Research Communities" are currently undergoing similar characterization.

Importantly, in a previous study published by Braekeveldt, they also showed that patientderived neuroblastoma xenografts retained molecular, cellular, genetic and histopathologic features of the primary tumor {{18132057}}. Thus, in two independent laboratories, neuroblastoma xenografts have been generated that retain the genetic and phenotypic features of the patient tumor and can be passaged in vivo and in culture. These patient derived xenografts have many advantages over cell lines that have been maintained in culture for many years and will provide a useful resource for the biomedical research community.

Preclincial testing and drug screening using orthotopic xenograftsIn order to demonstrate the feasibility of using the orthotopic xenografts for preclinical studies, we tested standard of care induction chemotherapy and molecular targeted therapeutic combinations previously shown to have activity for neuroblastoma in mouse models. Key features of our study are the use of AUC guided dosing and clinically relevant schedules of drug combinations. Also, the mice were randomized into different treatment arms and the study was performed double blind to minimize any experimental bias. We also entered all the primary data from each mouse and the histopathological analysis of the individual tumors into a central database using OpenClinica. This allows us to share the raw data with other investigators and provides a convenient platform to test hypotheses and identify biologically relevant correlations. Finally, we showed that the orthotopic xenografts can be cultured as primary acute cultures and used to test drug sensitivity in vitro. While this does not recapitulate the complexity of the tumor microenvironment in vivo, it does allow researchers to test a large number of individual drugs quickly. In addition, this technique will also allow for more sophisticated in vitro studies of drug combinations as novel agents become available. Promising new therapeutic agents can then be efficiently moved in vivo using our standard procedure for preclinical testing. This is also important because it suggests that the agents tested here (OSI-906, BEZ235 and BKM120) have very limited efficacy in this high-risk orthotopic neuroblastoma xenograft model when combined with induction chemotherapy.

