Due to the complexity of human motion, the diversity of factors that affect the gait, and the uncertainty of measurement, there are several unique challenges in the wearable-device-based gait recognition, such as intraclass variability, interclass similarity, etc. All the gait data are similar because they are cyclic multivariate time series, but even for one subject, the gait data may vary significantly with his or her clothes, payloads or health status. For example, the results for one subject in the McGill dataset between the different day testing and the same day testing are very different. Although several attempts have been made to improve the performance of the different day testing, the recognition accuracy is still low. Nevertheless, as shown in the experimental results, the proposed approach has still made a certain improvement in recognition accuracy and usability, which make it possible to be an effective solution to gait recognition or other problems of one-class or multi-class classification using period time series signal. More specifically: (1) the grid-based greedy method provides a means for a more accurate periodic signal segmentation; (2) the AE-GDI is used to encode rich spatial and temporal characteristics from the raw sensor data into the image-like representation; (3) the use of CNN for automatic feature extraction and classification avoids a lot of labor and empirical knowledge.

It is noticeable that the gait segmentation is essential for a reliable performance, although in human activity recognition (HAR) which is similar to gait recognition, overlap window strategy is more popular for preparing the data. This is because the difference of different classes in gait recognition is much smaller than that in HAR. A high accurate gait segmentation may help the classifier focus on effective gait features instead of their similar periodicity, which is the reason why many researches on gait recognition manage to improve their gait segmenting performance before they extract gait features and design effective classifier.

Our gait segmentation algorithm, which employs periodicity constraint before accurately locating gait starting positions by greedy searching, can effectively avoid misjudgment of fraud gait cycles. Unfortunately, however, it needs a minimum length of the acceleration magnitude time series that is used for gait detection, at least as long as two complete consecutive gait cycles, simply because the grid based periodicity constraint cannot work for the time series including only one gait cycle. At the same time, the length of gait cycles varies with execution time, so the length of the acceleration magnitude time series cannot be too long. In this context, we choose l = 4 s. AE-GDI is a novel 2D representation for gait pattern, which has a similar encoding strategy as GDI but with different meta-feature encodings. The meta features used in AE-GDI are based on the angle between two line segments with the same starting point formed by time delayed sampling on the inertial sensor data sequence. AE-GDI has the form of a two-dimensional matrix, with its rows and columns corresponding to time stamps and time delay values respectively. A comparative study shows our method using AE-GDI as gait representation outperforms that using GDI. In fact, both From the results, we can see that for the same day testing, with the increasing number of convolutional layers and output dimension of the first fully connected layer, the accuracies increase accordingly. While for other testings, we get the best results when 3 convolutional layers are used and the output dimension of the first fully connected layer is 1024, which are the same configuration as shown in Figure 1.

Due to the complexity of human motion, the diversity of factors that affect the gait, and the uncertainty of measurement, there are several unique challenges in the wearable-device-based gait recognition, such as intraclass variability, interclass similarity, etc. All the gait data are similar because they are cyclic multivariate time series, but even for one subject, the gait data may vary significantly with his or her clothes, payloads or health status. For example, the results for one subject in the McGill dataset between the different day testing and the same day testing are very different. Although several attempts have been made to improve the performance of the different day testing, the recognition accuracy is still low.

Nevertheless, as shown in the experimental results, the proposed approach has still made a certain improvement in recognition accuracy and usability, which make it possible to be an effective solution to gait recognition or other problems of one-class or multi-class classification using period time series signal. More specifically: (1) the grid-based greedy method provides a means for a more accurate periodic signal segmentation; (2) the AE-GDI is used to encode rich spatial and temporal characteristics from the raw sensor data into the image-like representation; (3) the use of CNN for automatic feature extraction and classification avoids a lot of labor and empirical knowledge.

It is noticeable that the gait segmentation is essential for a reliable performance, although in human activity recognition (HAR) which is similar to gait recognition, overlap window strategy is more popular for preparing the data. This is because the difference of different classes in gait recognition is much smaller than that in HAR. A high accurate gait segmentation may help the classifier focus on effective gait features instead of their similar periodicity, which is the reason why many researches on gait recognition manage to improve their gait segmenting performance before they extract gait features and design effective classifier.

Our gait segmentation algorithm, which employs periodicity constraint before accurately locating gait starting positions by greedy searching, can effectively avoid misjudgment of fraud gait cycles. Unfortunately, however, it needs a minimum length of the acceleration magnitude time series that is used for gait detection, at least as long as two complete consecutive gait cycles, simply because the grid based periodicity constraint cannot work for the time series including only one gait cycle. At the same time, the length of gait cycles varies with execution time, so the length of the acceleration magnitude time series cannot be too long. In this context, we choose l = 4 s. AE-GDI is a novel 2D representation for gait pattern, which has a similar encoding strategy as GDI but with different meta-feature encodings. The meta features used in AE-GDI are based on the angle between two line segments with the same starting point formed by time delayed sampling on the inertial sensor data sequence. AE-GDI has the form of a two-dimensional matrix, with its rows and columns corresponding to time stamps and time delay values respectively. A comparative study shows our method using AE-GDI as gait representation outperforms that using GDI. In fact, both grid-based greedy gait detection method and AE-GDI encoding should work together to prepare rich discriminative gait signal for the feature extractor in the next stage of the proposed approach.

To extract the high-level features in AE-GDIs efficiently and automatically, CNN is used to build the classifier to identify gait pattern without the need of manually extracting the high-level features. There are many much deeper CNN prototypes available now, for example, GoogLeNet {{206592484}} for image classification has 27 neural layers. In early experiments, we found these deep neural networks are prone to cause over-fitting for our experimental scenarios. The over-fitting is mainly caused by the major challenges of gait recognition, i.e., intraclass variability and interclass similarity, so that it is difficult to learn a clear deterministic boundary for gait classification using traditional machine learning methods with hand craft features. In this context, our seven-layer CNN achieves better results with higher computing efficiency. Another finding during designing the CNN framework is that the CNN without zero padding in each convolution operation can obtain slightly better results than that with zero padding.

Computing efficiency is always an important issue in human-involved applications, especially in human-computer interaction scenarios. Considering a case of gait labeling using the complete set of subjects, which is the most complicated case in this paper, the final CNN model has a classifier with 744 classes and consists of 6,268,320 parameters. As a parametric machine learning model, the execution time of CNN has nothing to do with the number of training samples, but only depends on the dimensions of the input feature. We measured the average time of a single run for single sample in the experiment where the resolution of AE-GDI is 32 × 64 and N l = 2, and the execution time is less than 0.02 s, indicating that the proposed method is suitable for real-time applications. Obviously, the performance can be further improved when the proposed approach is implemented and run based on parallel computing platform or other distributed computing environments.

The two public datasets we chose are highly representative: the McGill dataset is close to the real application scenario, while the OU-ISIR dataset has the largest number of subjects. The downside of the OU-ISIR dataset is that it only consists of short-term inertial sensor data. Although we perform training for 50 epochs, the number of the samples is still relatively small. Despite the small sample size, we can still achieve an accuracy of more than 60% for the gait labeling problem with more than 700 classes, indicating that the proposed parameterized gait recognition method has a strong potential for gait labeling application with a large number of subjects.

