
Background

Presumptive treatment of suspected cases of malaria based on symptoms is common in many endemic areas. In Bo, Sierra Leone, more than half of adults who think they have malaria make presumptive self-diagnoses and then treat at home, usually with herbs or with pharmaceuticals purchased without prescriptions in local markets {{1437023}}. The 2013 Malaria Indicator Survey in Sierra Leone found that 29% of urban children and 41% of rural children were not taken to a healthcare facility when they had fevers {{not_in_s2orc}}. These statistics indicate a high rate of malaria treatment without testing. Treating suspected malaria without first confirming the presence of Plasmodium parasites may lead to a variety of negative individual and community health outcomes due to the misuse of anti-parasitic medications, money wasted on ineffective or unnecessary treatments, and delayed therapy for the actual cause of the fever when the illness is not due to malaria {{20700141}}. The World Health Organization and global health partnerships recommend the use of diagnostic testing to avoid unnecessary treatment {{not_in_s2orc}}. Initiatives such as 'test-treat-track' promote testing all persons suspected to have malaria, treating with antimalarial drugs only those who have a positive malaria test result, and tracking progress toward malaria control through health surveillance systems {{14536605}}.
Two main types of malaria tests are currently available, microscopy and rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs). Microscopic diagnosis is based on visualizing Plasmodium parasites in stained and magnified blood smears. Although microscopy is still considered the gold standard for malaria testing because it shows the actual presence or absence of the parasites and allows the parasite load to be quantified {{33198901}}, microscopes are usually only available at clinical laboratories. Microscopy is also dependent on the skill of the laboratory technician, and the sensitivity and specificity of the test may vary considerably depending on the person performing the examination {{33198901}}{{10844924}}.
RDTs do not visualize the parasite but instead detect antigens present in a small sample of blood applied to a test strip {{33198901}}{{10844924}}. Within about five to 20 minutes of applying the blood of a person with malaria to a test strip, one or more lines will appear in the window of the test kit indicating if parasitic antigens have been detected {{33198901}}{{10844924}}. One line usually indicates a negative test result, and two (or more) lines indicate the presence of the antigen {{33198901}}. The results may also indicate an invalid result, which would require the test to be re-administered with a new kit. RDTs are a type of point-of-care test (POCT) or point-of-need test {{30808505}}. While RDTs are most often used at clinical facilities, they can also be used in home and community settings by community health workers (CHWs) and community health volunteers (CHVs). POCTs are useful when they are cost-effective and accurate tools for providing rapid diagnostic results {{30808505}}. Studies in a variety of settings have demonstrated that malaria RDTs have adequately high sensitivity and specificity {{33198901}} and can be cost-effective when compared to microscopy {{17043489}}{{18750996}}{{9123380}}{{3054915}}.
Although diagnosis prior to treatment is strongly encouraged by clinical guidelines, there are a variety of factors that limit access to and uptake of malaria testing. Cultural and community beliefs about blood and perceptions of healthcare providers may discourage testing {{6263749}}, lower-income households may not be able to afford testing or may not prioritize testing when budgeting for healthcare expenses {{20700141}}{{1219402}}, and rural residents may delay seeking care from the formal medical system because of the costs and time associated with travelling to a healthcare facility {{20889255}}{{35364155}}. The lack of physical or geographical access to testing is one that can be at least partly addressed by programmes offering community case management (CCM) of malaria. CCM may also overcome some cultural and economic barriers {{not_in_s2orc}}{{6084901}}.
CCM programmes empower CHWs and CHVs to offer basic, low-cost healthcare services to households that might not otherwise have routine access to medical assistance. CHWs and CHVs participating in CCM programmes for malaria perform two key functions: using RDTs to confirm suspected malaria cases and then dispensing anti-malarial drugs to those who test positive for malaria with an RDT {{74007}}. The RDT kits used by CHWs and CHVs generally include disposable gloves, alcohol swabs, a lancet for drawing a small amount of blood, the test kit itself, any buffer solutions necessary for the test, and a small container for safely disposing of the lancet and other hazardous materials {{not_in_s2orc}}. CHWs and CHVs also maintain stocks of commonly needed medications. The ability to use RDTs outside of a laboratory-based setting may increase the number of febrile persons willing to take a malaria test.
The purpose of this study was to use a cross-sectional population-based sampling approach to examine malaria testing practices, attitudes towards malaria testing, and preferences for testing location in rural and urban Bo, Sierra Leone.

Methods

Study area

This study was conducted in the city of Bo, Sierra Leone's second largest urban area, and in surrounding rural areas within the Bo District. Sierra Leone is located on the coast of West Africa, and Bo District is located in the nation's Southern Province. Falciparum malaria is endemic in Sierra Leone, and the country has one of the highest prevalence rates of malaria in the world {{not_in_s2orc}}. Malaria diagnosis (usually through microscopy rather than RDTs) and artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) are available free to users of all ages from public providers {{not_in_s2orc}}. There are few healthcare facilities in rural areas, but the city of Bo is home to a diversity of public and private outpatient clinics and several hospitals offering both inpatient and outpatient services {{not_in_s2orc}}{{1027998}}.
Study population

In 2009, Mercy Hospital Research Laboratory (MHRL) used a participatory geographic information system (GIS) process to map the entire city of Bo, including the locations of all residential, public and commercial structures {{14590349}}. The GIS has been regularly updated since then. This database enabled MHRL to use a geographybased sampling method to recruit households from Bo city for this study. A two-stage cluster (neighbourhoodbased) sampling method was used to identify urban participants. First, seven of 68 sections (neighbourhoods) in the city of Bo were randomly sampled, and then 30 households from each of those seven sections were randomly sampled for participation. In the rural areas, 23 rural communities (villages) were randomly sampled for participation from a list of the 1,266 villages in Bo District. Interviewers visited these communities to recruit participants. When fewer than 30 households were located within the community, interviewers visited residences at the periphery of the villages until they had contacted 30 households. In total, 824 of the 900 (91.6%) contacted households participated in the study, including 667 of 690 (96.7%) rural households and 157 of 210 (74.8%) urban households.
In each of the 824 participating households, one adult representative (age 18 or older) was asked to participate in a study of attitudes and practices related to malaria testing. The interviewers preferentially recruited household members who said they were febrile at the time of data collection. In both the urban and rural areas, the interviewers alternated between asking to interview a female household member and requesting an interview with a male household member. If an adult of the preferred gender was not available, a household member of the opposite gender was interviewed instead. Responses to interviewer questions were recorded in an OpenData-Kit questionnaire installed on smartphones. All interviews were completed between 14 December, 2013 and 31 January, 2014.
Questionnaire

Each participant was asked whether he or she was currently febrile or without fever. Based on this response, the next questions related to either the current fever or to the most recent febrile illness the participant had experienced. The first set of questions asked whether a diagnostic test had been performed to determine the cause of the fever. Participants who did not complete a diagnostic test during the current or most recent febrile illness were asked a series of yes/no questions about their reasons for not seeking a microbiologicallyconfirmed diagnosis. The next set of questions asked whether the participant consulted a doctor or other healthcare professional about the fever and, if so, asked about the clinician's recommendations for testing. Participants were asked about their attitudes about homebased self-testing, CHV-assisted home-based testing and laboratory-based malaria testing. Data were also collected about demographics, socio-economic status and self-rated quality of life.
Ethical considerations

The study was approved by the institutional review boards of Njala University, George Mason University, the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, the US Naval Research Laboratory, and the Office of the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (SLESRC). Participation was voluntary, and no incentives or compensation for participation were provided. All participants provided a thumbprint as documentation of their informed consent.

Analysis

The primary variable of interest for this analysis was a preference for home-based testing, whether conducted by self/family or by a CHV, over laboratory-based testing for suspected cases of malaria. Participants who answered both the "self/family vs. laboratory" and "CHV vs. laboratory" questions with a preference for homebased testing were considered to have a strong preference for home-based testing, and participants who answered both of these questions with a preference for laboratory-based testing were considered to have a strong preference for laboratory-based testing. Participants indicating no preference, those who would not take the test at either venue, and those who preferred home-based testing for one of the paired-comparison questions and laboratory-based testing for the other were not considered to have a strong preference for home-based or laboratory-based testing and were excluded from the analyses that focused on only participants with consistent preference for one of the two testing settings. Participant characteristics and testing preferences were compared using two-sided Pearson's Chi-squared tests. Because there were significant differences in the characteristics of rural and urban participants, most analyses were conducted separately by location. The statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS version 22 with a significance level of α = 0.05.

Results

The age and gender distributions of rural and urban participants were similar ( Table 1). The mean age of the participants was 40.9 years (standard deviation: 18.3), with half of the participants male and half female, as per the study design. However, there were significant socioeconomic differences by location, with rural residents reporting lower levels of education (p < 0.001), lower rates of literacy (p < 0.001) and less ownership of mobile phones (p < 0.001). Rural residents were also more likely than urban residents to rate their quality of life and their health status as poor (p < 0.01). Because of these significant differences by location, all analyses were conducted separately for rural and urban participants.
Participant answers to the paired-comparison questions about preferred malaria testing location expressed a significant preference for home-based testing over laboratory-based testing in rural areas (Table 2). Among the 660 rural residents who responded to these questions, 68.8% (n = 454) preferred home-based testing by self/family or by a CHV over laboratory-based testing; {{not_in_s2orc}}.8% (131) preferred laboratory-based testing over home-based testing; 4.2% (28) rated laboratory-based  testing as better than CHV-assisted testing but worse than self/family testing; 2.6% (17) rated laboratory-based testing as better than self/family testing but worse than CHV-assisted testing; and 4.5% (30) indicated no preference or said they would decline all of these testing options. Among the 154 urban residents who responded, 38.3% (59) preferred home-based testing over laboratory-based testing and 43.5% (67) preferred laboratory-based testing over home-based testing. In both rural and urban areas, CHV-assisted home-based testing was preferred over self/ family-conducted home-based testing. In rural areas, 68.1% (450) preferred CHV-assisted testing compared to only 28.1% (186) who preferred self/family-conducted testing. In urban areas, 76.8% (119) preferred testing by a CHV and 21.3% (33) preferred testing by self or a family member.
In total, 47.8% (n = 308/644) of the rural participants and 75.3% (116/154) of the urban participants said they usually consult with a healthcare provider about suspected malaria (Table 3). Among rural and urban participants, 37.1% (247/666) and 55.8% (87/156), respectively, reported having had a diagnostic test to determine the cause of the most recent febrile illness, 35.6% (231/649) and 62.7% (94/150) reported usually taking a diagnostic test to confirm suspected malaria, and 89.5% (578/646) and 88.2% (125/153) said that they usually bought medications or herbs to treat malaria without first consulting with a healthcare provider.
Rates of preference for home-based testing and for laboratory-based testing were similar in rural and urban areas by gender (p = 0.488 and 0.713, respectively), age (p = 0.670 and 0.605), and years of education (p = 0.094 and 0.039, with urban residents with more education more likely to prefer laboratory-based testing). There was no difference in testing location preference by fever status at the time of the survey (p = 0.929). Among rural residents, a preference for home-based testing over laboratory-testing was especially high among those who were not comfortable reading a newspaper (p = 0.006), those not owning a mobile phone (p = 0.031), those who reported usually self-treating suspected malaria rather than consulting with a healthcare provider (p < 0.001), and those who believe that adult fevers are always caused by malaria (p < 0.001). Among urban residents, a preference for home-based testing over laboratorytesting was especially high among those who were able to read English (p = 0.003) and comfortable reading a newspaper (p = 0.001), those who did not usually take a diagnostic test to confirm suspected malaria (p < 0.001), and those who reported being very confident about their ability to perform a malaria self-test after training (p < 0.001). Those who indicated a preference for home-based testing were significantly more likely than those preferring laboratory-based testing to say that they would be willing to pay extra for the option of a homebased test, and this was found in both rural (p < 0.001) and urban (p = 0.005) areas.
In total, 31.7% (198/625) of rural participants and 27.3% (42/154) of urban participants said they were very confident they could perform a malaria test on themselves or a family member without assistance. Among those indicating a preference for self/family-conducted home-based testing over CHV-assisted testing, 74.2% (138/186) of rural residents and 33.3% (11/33) of urban residents were very confident in their ability to conduct a test on themselves or a family member. Reported selfconfidence was lower among participants indicating a preference for a home-based tested administered by a CHV rather than self/family, with only 14.0% (60/428) of rural residents and 26.1% (31/119) or urban residents with this preference saying they were very confident in their self-testing ability. In total, 50.1% (314/627) of the rural participants were very confident they could perform a test if they had been trained on how to use a test kit, including 88.7% (165/186) with a preference for self/family-conducted home-based testing and 34.0% (146/430) with a preference for testing administered by a CHV. Among the urban participants, 61.7% (95/154) were very confident in their testing abilities if trained, including 75.8% (25/33) with a preference for self/familyconducted home-based testing and 58.8% (70/119) with a preference for testing administered by a CHV.
Among the 488 participants who did not seek a diagnostic test for their most recent febrile illness, 330 (67.6%) preferred a home-based test and 95 (19.5%) preferred a laboratory-based test ( Table 4). The most common reasons for not seeking testing were similar for both testing preference and location groups: not wanting to spend money on the test (68.0%), waiting to see if the fever resolved within a few days (45.0%), not wanting to travel to a clinical facility for a test (41.0%) and assuming that a formal diagnosis was not needed because adults could presumptively diagnose the cause of the fever (37.4%). Those with a preference for home-based testing were more likely than those with a preference for laboratory-based testing to say that they did not need a test because they already knew the cause of the fever (p = 0.025). Urban non-testers were significantly more likely than rural non-testers to assume that they already knew the cause of the fever (p = <0.001) and to say that they did not want to wait for test results (p = 0.010). A dislike of blood draws was not a common reason not to seek testing (15.6%).

Conclusions

Expanded access to CCM might improve access to diagnosis and appropriate, timely and cost-efficient treatment. Existing CHV networks in Sierra Leone could provide a foundation for intensifying CCM. The success of home-based testing in these communities would likely be dependent on (1) a high level of respect for and trust in new and existing CHVs by the communities they support; (2) the availability of a strong network of CHVs who are confident in their own RDT skills and are able to conduct tests themselves as well as teach others to conduct tests; (3) sufficient public health resources to support 'train-the-trainer' sessions to teach CHVs how to coach their neighbours through their first self/family malaria tests; and, (4) a competitive price point for home test kits when compared to the out-of-pocket costs of laboratory-based testing.
The possible importance of home-based self-testing has been highlighted by the recent Ebola outbreak. In the months after this survey was conducted, hundreds of cases of Ebola occurred in Bo district {{26074854}}{{not_in_s2orc}}. Many clinics and hospitals in Bo closed their doors rather than risk exposing their staff to the Ebola virus, and others were forced to temporarily close because of quarantines. Laboratory-based testing for febrile illnesses became more difficult to conduct and more costly due to the need to assume that all biological specimens could be from a patient with Ebola, even when the most likely diagnosis was something more common and much less fatal. Quarantines meant that some CHVs in rural areas could not travel from their home villages to neighbouring ones or stopped volunteering because they feared contracting Ebola. Thus, access to routine medical care, including diagnosis and treatment of common infections such as malaria, decreased significantly, especially in rural areas that already had limited access to health services. Home-based testing that allows trained individuals with suspected malaria to test themselves and family members at home, thus limiting the exposure of others to their blood, could improve the home-based care that has become necessary for many households as a result of the strain Ebola put on the entire healthcare system of Sierra Leone.




CITED_PAPERS:


10253380:Low referral completion of rapid diagnostic test-negative patients in community-based treatment of malaria in Sierra Leone


Background

Malaria is one of the leading causes of mortality and morbidity among children in Sub-Saharan Africa. The disease causes nearly 800,000 deaths per year, most of which are in children under five years of age [1]. Sierra Leone has one of the highest under-five mortality rates in the world, corresponding to 269 deaths per 1,000 live births [2]. Malaria is hyper-endemic and one of the main killers in children under five years of age in the country [3]. Due to the high chloroquine resistance, the Ministry of Health and Sanitation (MOHS) in Sierra Leone in 2004 changed the first-line therapy of the national malaria protocol to artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) [4]. Based on the new WHO recommendations, the MOHS has recently decided to increase the use of rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs), particularly in settings where capacity for microscopic diagnosis is limited [5]. Access to health care is still a major problem for the population in Sierra Leone. Several factors such as poverty, lack of transport, distance and user fees contribute to delayed care-seeking for febrile children, especially in rural areas [6].
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) has been working in Sierra Leone since 1995. In collaboration with the MOHS in Bo and Pujehun districts, MSF provides free primary and secondary health care. In 2008 malaria accounted for over 40% of all consultations in the MSFsupported clinics and health posts in Bo and Pujehun districts [7]. At the end of 2007, MSF introduced Community Malaria Volunteers (CMVs) in order to provide free and effective malaria treatment closer to the community. The CMVs were identified and selected by the community based on three main criteria: they should be able to read and write; they should speak English and they should be respected and liked in the community. Early 2008 the selected CMVs were given three days of training on diagnosis and treatment of malaria using RDTs (Paracheck ® ), ACT (artesunate-amodiaquine) and paracetamol. They were also trained to recognize and ask for signs of severe malaria (e.g. convulsions, unconsciousness, repeated vomiting, little or no output of urine, diarrhoea, dehydration and anaemia). The training was both theoretical and practical, including a session on how to perform and read RDTs.
By June 2009, a total of 136 CMVs operated in 130 villages within MSF's catchment area treating children between three months and five years of age and pregnant women, except for those in the first trimester of their pregnancy, for malaria. Two CMV supervisors with motorcycles oversaw the CMV activities and carried out random supervision visits and monthly meetings where drugs and RDTs were distributed, statistics were collected and general issues related to the CMVs' work were discussed. The CMVs were meant to refer all cases with signs of severe malaria and those with complaints of fever but with a negative RDT to the nearest health facility, located within a range of three to 18 kilometres from the villages where the CMVs were based.
A key component of community-based malaria care, using minimally-trained volunteers, is an effective referral system, to ensure that patients with severe malaria or other illnesses receive treatment. This has been discussed in several studies, describing various referral patterns and with referral completion rates varying from 37.5% to 87% [8][9][10]. Before this study there had been no follow up of CMV referrals in MSF's communitybased malaria programme, and there was a need to evaluate the programme defining total referrals, referral completion and outcome of referrals. The findings would be of relevance for all MSF projects focusing on malaria, as well as for other organizations and programmes involved in community-based treatment of malaria. Thus, the aim of this study was to determine the referral rate, compliance and diagnostic profile of referrals from CMVs to the MSF supported health structures in two districts in Sierra Leone.

Methods


Setting

This study took place in MSF's operational area in rural areas of Bo and Pujehun districts, Sierra Leone, with an estimated target population of 302,000. These districts were hyper-endemic malaria zones with high transmission rates all year, especially during the rainy season from June to October. The CMV catchment area consisted of 130 villages. There were one or two CMVs in each village depending on population size. The CMVs were divided into 16 networks, each linked to a health centre or a health post for supervision and referral. These health structures were under the responsibility of the MOHS but jointly managed by MSF. Health care was provided for free, and MSF covered costs for staff salaries, drugs and medical materiel and provided supervision. Health posts were provided with partial support (limited number of drugs for children less than 15 years of age and pregnant women). The distance from the villages to the nearest MSF supported health structure varied from three to over 18 kilometres. Apart from the MSF-supported health structures there were no other major care providers (e.g. private clinics or drug vendors).

Population

The study population included all children between three and 59 months of age and pregnant women in their second or third trimester who were recorded in the CMV recording forms as referrals. The CMVs had been trained to refer all patients with signs of severe malaria and a positive RDT and all patients with complaints of fever but with a negative RDT. Children less than three months of age and pregnant women in their first trimester, who would always be referred due to contra-indications of ACT, were excluded. Patients with incomplete or un-interpretable data and repeated referrals were also excluded from the study ( Figure 1).

Study procedures and data collection

Data on patients seen by CMVs were entered in a recording form and included basic demographic information, RDT result, treatment given and date of and indications for referral. The CMVs were instructed about the importance of accurate data recording. In addition, a referral follow-up register was introduced in June 2009 into all 16 MSF-supported health structures linked to a CMV network. The health centre/health post personnel were trained on how to fill it in properly and were instructed to ask each patient arriving at the structure whether or not he/she was referred from a CMV.
The health structure register contained basic demographic information as well as final diagnosis and treatment. The CMV recording forms were collected during monthly supervision visits by two CMV-supervisors. All records from CMVs and referral follow-up registers were matched and demographic data, date of arrival, name of health structure and name of the referring CMV were compared. If all the above data matched, the referral was confirmed as being completed.   the health structure (> or < 24 hrs) were recorded. The data collection was overseen by the field investigator, who was able to give regular support to CMV supervisors, health centre/health post nurses and others involved in this study at field level. All data were routinely collected from the CMVs and the health structures. Raw data were entered, validated and encoded in Sierra Leone by the field investigator and mission epidemiologist, with the help of three data-encoders.

Analysis

The analysis of record reviews was carried out over a three months period, from the 1 st of September to the 30 th of November 2009. Every village and CMV had an assigned code that was used when entering and crosschecking the data. All patients included in the study were assigned an identification number to facilitate study-related documentation and ensure confidentiality. The principal investigator, who had previously worked as field coordinator in MSF's project, did the analysis at Karolinska Institutet in Stockholm. All data were coded, entered into the data analysis software and doublechecked to ensure consistency and accuracy. Data was analysed for frequencies of referral completion and stratified by sex, age and RDT-status using EpiInfo, version 3.5.1.

Ethics

The routinely collected programme data that was used in this study was handled with confidentiality. The study was approved by MSF's Ethics Review Board. Permission to carry out the study had previously been granted from the MOHS in Sierra Leone.

Results


Demographic characteristics

During the study period the CMVs saw a total of 17,130 patients with complaints of fever. Out of these patients 12,204 (71%) were eligible children and 4,901 (28%) were pregnant women. Out of 2,554 patients registered as referred, 25 patients (1%) were male adults (19) or children above five years of age (6), not fitting the inclusion criteria. Seventeen patient-entries were excluded from the survey due to incomplete or un-interpretable data and 53 referrals were excluded as they were less than three months of age (51) or pregnant women in their first trimester (2). Out of the 2,459 remaining referrals, 2,042 (83%) were children under five years of age and 417 (17%) were pregnant women ( Table 1). Out of the 2,042 children 1,102 (54%) were male and 940 (46%) were female. The mean age for the children was 2.4 years. The age of the pregnant women varied from13 to 49 years with a mean of 25 years (Table 2).

Overall referral rate and reasons for referral

Out of the 17,130 patients seen by a CMV, 2,554 (14.9%) were referred to the nearest MSF-supported health structure. A total of 17% (2,093) of the children under five and 8.5% (419) of the pregnant women were given a referral advice. The referral rate varied from 15.7% (876/5,566) to 13.4% (796/5,937) over the three study months. Out of the total referrals, 99.3% (2,442/ 2,459) had a negative RDT while 17 (0.7%) tested positive, and were referred with signs of severe malaria. The main referral reason for RDT-negative patients was indicated as "fever" (99.7%, 2,436/2,442). RDT-positive patients were referred for different reasons, such as "complicated", "fever/vomiting", "fever/cough" and "high fever".

Referral completion rate and determinants of referral compliance

During the full study period only 36 out of 2,459 patients completed their referral, indicating a referral completion rate of 1.5%. The referral completion rate   (Figure 2).

Outcome of completed referrals and significance of time

The outcome analysis was limited to the final diagnosis, listed in the CMV referral follow-up register books. All patients referred with a positive RDT should have had signs of severe/complicated malaria. According to the CMV referral follow-up registers, a large part (40%, 6/15) of these patients were diagnosed as "malaria". Others were diagnosed as "malaria/anaemia" (20%, 3/15), "malaria/acute respiratory infection (ARI)" (13%, 2/15), "malaria/convulsion" (13%, 2/15), "malaria/vomiting" (6.7%, 1/15) and "malaria/skin infection" (6.7%, 1/15). Out of the patients referred with a negative RDT, the most common diagnosis was "ARI" (38%, 8/21), followed by "common cold" (19%, 4/21), "abscess", "skin infection", "fever of unknown origin", "headache" (9.5%, 2/21 respectively) and "nephritis" (4.8%, 1/21). Out of the 36 patients who completed their referral and arrived at a health structure, 92% (33/36) arrived on the same day or within 24 hours. Three patients (8%) arrived at the health structure after 24 hours (Table 3).

Discussion

This study showed that very few patients who were given a referral advice from a CMV completed their referral. This is an important operational finding, questioning the quality of care of community-based malaria programmes relying on referral of cases with RDT-negative fever. The RDT result was found to be a significant determinant of referral completion. Less than one percent of patients with a negative RDT completed their referral, while nearly 90 percent of patients who tested positive for malaria, but could not be treated by the CMV, arrived at a health structure. This finding suggests that patients with signs of severe malaria usually complete their referral.
A large variation of referral completion across the 16 networks was notable. It could possibly be linked to variations in distance, CMV performance or differences in registration and follow-up by the health personnel in the various health structures. Due to the small number of completed referrals, no conclusions could be drawn regarding the outcome or timeliness of referrals.
Limited access to healthcare and lack of trained health workers has increased attention to task-shifting. Community Health Workers (CHWs), trained to recognize and treat simple malaria at village level, are becoming an integral part of many health systems. Research has shown that community-based malaria control programmes can reduce paediatric hospitalisations [11], improve care-seeking behaviour [12] and reduce the   workload in health facilities [13]. Still, only a few studies give evidence for reduced mortality [14,15] and additional research is definitely needed in order to guide policy decision-making and implementation [16]. An important factor in the use of CHWs to reduce mortality is completion of their referrals. Referral compliance varies in different contexts and at various levels of health care. In Uganda, 87% of patients referred to health centres by CHWs complied with the referral [10], while compliance among referrals from health centres to hospital was only 28% [17]. Several factors can influence adherence to referrals including access (e.g. transportation, overnight stay) and family dynamics (mother not being the decision maker) [18]. Signs of severity, such as altered consciousness and convulsions, can increase adherence up to three times, while costs (e.g. for lab services) led to four to five times lower adherence [8].
It is difficult to understand why the referral completion rate in MSF's CMV programme was so low. There could be several reasons, as described above, but adequate supervision and training could be one way of improving the referral compliance. Several studies have shown that training is essential in order to ensure a successful community-based malaria programme. For example, training of caretakers, as well as of private drug vendors in Nigeria has lead to improved recognition, treatment and referrals of malaria cases [19,20]. A training programme for CHWs in Mali increased adherence to referrals to an encouraging 87% [9]. Health worker actions, such as giving a referral slip and advising caretakers to go to the hospital immediately, can also improve referral completion [18]. It is, however, important to bear in mind that CHWs require not only training, but also adequate supervision and remuneration [21]. In MSF's programme supervision is a challenge, with only two CMV supervisors overseeing and coordinating the CMV activities.
One possible strategy to reduce the poor referral compliance rate is to narrow the diagnostic criteria for referral so that patients could avoid unnecessary costs and time in attending a health structure. CMVs could receive additional training regarding respiratory infections to distinguish between serious signs of pneumonia (e.g. increased respiratory rate) and those of common cold viruses. This strategy has support in the literature where CHWs have been able to diagnose and treat pneumonia in Nepal [22] and in Uganda [23]. To offer appropriate treatment to RDT-negative patients with fever, adapting the treatment criteria and training CMVs in diagnosing and treating for example pneumonia and diarrhoea, should also be considered. In Zambia, a cluster-randomized controlled trial among CHWs showed great potential for CHWs to manage both malaria and pneumonia at community level. Over 68% of the children treated for simple pneumonia by CHWs received early and appropriate treatment, compared to 13.3% of the children who were referred to the health centre [24]. This strategy would, however, put heavier responsibilities on CMVs that would require additional training, supervision and support.
There are some encouraging results from this study. Previous research shows that CHWs are capable of using and interpreting RDTs [25,26]. The high positivity rate in this study suggests that the CMVs are following the correct indications for testing, treating patients with simple malaria. The study also shows that the CMVs are, at least, suggesting referral for patients with signs of severe malaria and with negative RDTs. There is a possibility that the high RDT-positivity rate is due to overdiagnosing of malaria, and that patients might not have received a referral advice, though noted as referred. With increased supervision this could be prevented.
This retrospective study had several limitations. The short study duration may have been influenced by disease patterns, disease variations and seasonal activities such as farming, affecting caretakers' behaviour. The low number of referral completions did not allow for a proper analysis of outcome and timeliness of referrals, as well as for impact of distance from villages to referral structures. As analysis of data was done through record reviews it could not be verified that all referred RDTpositive patients had signs of severe malaria. Analysis of signs of severe disease among RDT-negative patients could also not be carried out. The record review was done in two steps: comparison of the two records (CMV recording forms and CMV referral follow up register) and encoding of this data was done in the field. The data analysis was done at Karolinska Institutet, and there is a possibility of misinterpretation of data. With only two CMV supervisors responsible for data collection and direct CMV supervision, it is possible that referred patients were not properly entered in the CMV recording forms. There is also a risk that patients were missed due to variations in their own or their caretaker's name. Using three different data-clerks in the field for encoding might have increased data errors. Finally, a qualitative, in-depth study, interviewing CMVs, health personnel and patients could give a better picture of the underlying reasons for non-compliance of referrals.

Conclusions

This study showed that most RDT-negative patients with fever seen by CMVs in a community-based programme in Sierra Leone did not arrive at a referral structure. This finding has prompted a review of the programme by MSF. To map the underlying reasons for non-completion of referrals and to define a suitable strategy for improving the referral completion in MSF's community-based programme, additional research is needed. Similar community-based malaria programmes should assess their referral-completion rates to ensure that patients with severe malaria or other illnesses receive treatment.

Figure 1

1Flowchart showing study inclusion and referral outcome.

Figure 2

2Referral completion by RDT-status.

Table 1

1Total CMV consultations over the defined study periodCMV consultations 
n 
RDT+ 
(%) 
RDT-
(%)
< 5 years 
12204
Pregnant 
4901
Others 
25
Total 
17130 
14235 
(83.0) 
2895 
(17.0)

Table 2

2General characteristics of eligible study populationChildren < 5 y 
M 
F 
Tot. 
(%)
Total 
1102 
940 
2042 
(83.0)
< 1 y 
131 
128 
259 
(10.5)
1 y 
184 
170 
354 
(14.4)
2 y 
274 
233 
507 
(20.6)
3 y 
234 
195 
429 
(17.4) 
4 y 
201 
136 
337 
(13.7)
5 y 
78 
78 
156 
(6.3)
Pregnant women 
n 
(%)
Total 
417 
(17.0)
> 15 y 
3 
(0.1)
15-19 y 
66 
(2.7)
20-24 y 
137 
(5.6)
25-29 y 
121 
(4.9) 
30-34 y 
58 
(2.4)
35-39 y 
21 
(0.9)
40-44 y 
7 
(0.3)
45-49 y 
4 
(0.2)
Total referred 
n 
(%)
2459 
(100.0)

Table 3

3Final diagnosis of completed referralsn 
(%) 
< 24 
hours
> 24 
hours
AcknowledgementsAcknowledgments to the MSF field team and in particular to the data encoders: Eric M. Yajo, Martha Konneh and Alim Barry. We also thank the CMVs in Bo and Pujehun districts, Sierra Leone, who carries out their work tirelessly. The study was supported by a grant from the Swedish National Board for Health and Welfare (project Kunskapscentrum för Katastrofmedicin) in Stockholm, Sweden.Author details1Division of Global Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.2Médecins Sans Frontières Operational Centre Brussels, Belgium.3Médecins Sans Frontières Operational Centre Brussels, Bo, Sierra Leone.Authors' contributions AT designed the study, analysed the data and wrote the paper with major contributions of the other authors. AM approved the study and initiated discussions around study objectives. TR contributed with the study design and gave input to the study protocol and manuscript. MK entered and analysed the data and supervised the fieldwork. JvS, SP and MdS monitored the study progress and contributed significantly to improve the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final draft.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.
WHO: World malaria report 2010 Geneva: World Health Organization. WHO: World malaria report 2010 Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
WHOSIS detailed database search: Under-five mortality rate (probability of dying by age 5 per 1000 live births), both sexes. Sierra LeoneWHOSIS detailed database search: Under-five mortality rate (probability of dying by age 5 per 1000 live births), both sexes, Sierra Leone [http://apps.who. int/whosis/data/Search.jsp], accessed 18 December 2010.
. Who: Sierra Leone Health Profile, WHO: Sierra Leone Health Profile 2010 [http://www.who.int/gho/countries/ sle.pdf], accessed 19 December.
Evidence basis for antimalarial policy change in Sierra Leone: five in vivo efficacy studies of chloroquine, sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine and amodiaquine. F Checci, P Roddy, S Kamara, A Williams, G Morineau, A R Wurie, B Hora, N De Lamotte, T Baerwaldt, A Heinzelmann, A Danks, L Pinoges, A Oloo, R Durand, L Ranford-Cartwright, M De Smet, Trop Med Int Health. 10Checci F, Roddy P, Kamara S, Williams A, Morineau G, Wurie AR, Hora B, de Lamotte N, Baerwaldt T, Heinzelmann A, Danks A, Pinoges L, Oloo A, Durand R, Ranford-Cartwright L, de Smet M: Evidence basis for antimalarial policy change in Sierra Leone: five in vivo efficacy studies of chloroquine, sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine and amodiaquine. Trop Med Int Health 2005, 10:146-153.
WHO: Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. Geneva: World Health OrganizationWHO: Guidelines for the treatment of malaria (second edition). Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
MSF: Full prescription. Better malaria treatment for more people, MSF's experience Brussels: Médecins Sans Frontières. MSF: Full prescription. Better malaria treatment for more people, MSF's experience Brussels: Médecins Sans Frontières; 2008.
Brussels: Médecins Sans Frontières Operational Centre Brussels. MSF: Sierra Leone Annual MedicalReportinternal documentMSF: Sierra Leone Annual Medical Report 2008 (internal document) Brussels: Médecins Sans Frontières Operational Centre Brussels; 2009.
Factors influencing adherence to referral advice following pre-referral treatment with artesunate suppositories in children in rural Tanzania. D O Simba, M Warsame, O Kimbute, D Kakoko, M Petzold, G Tomson, Z Premji, M Gomes, Trop Med Int Health. 14Simba DO, Warsame M, Kimbute O, Kakoko D, Petzold M, Tomson G, Premji Z, Gomes M: Factors influencing adherence to referral advice following pre-referral treatment with artesunate suppositories in children in rural Tanzania. Trop Med Int Health 2009, 14:775-783.
Increases in correct administration of chloroquine in the home and referral of sick children to health facilities through a community-based intervention in Bougouni District. P J Winch, A Bagayoko, A Diawara, M Kane, F Thiero, K Gilroy, Z Daou, Z Berthe, E Swedberg, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 97Winch PJ, Bagayoko A, Diawara A, Kane M, Thiero F, Gilroy K, Daou Z, Berthe Z, Swedberg E: Increases in correct administration of chloroquine in the home and referral of sick children to health facilities through a community-based intervention in Bougouni District, Mali. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2003, 97:481-490.
Community referral in home management of malaria in western Uganda: a case series study. K Kallander, G Tomson, J Nsungwa-Sabiiti, Y Senyonjo, G Pariyo, S Peterson, BMC Int Health Hum Rights. 62Kallander K, Tomson G, Nsungwa-Sabiiti J, Senyonjo Y, Pariyo G, Peterson S: Community referral in home management of malaria in western Uganda: a case series study. BMC Int Health Hum Rights 2006, 6:2.
Reduced paediatric hospitalizations for malaria and febrile illness patterns following implementation of a community-based malaria control programme in rural Rwanda. A C Sievers, J Lewey, P Musafiri, M F Franke, B J Bucyibaruta, S N Stulac, M L Rich, C Karema, J P Daily, World Hosp Health Serv. 44Sievers AC, Lewey J, Musafiri P, Franke MF, Bucyibaruta BJ, Stulac SN, Rich ML, Karema C, Daily JP: Reduced paediatric hospitalizations for malaria and febrile illness patterns following implementation of a community-based malaria control programme in rural Rwanda. World Hosp Health Serv 2008, 44:28-35.
Feasibility and acceptability of home-based management of malaria strategy adapted to Sudan's conditions using artemisinin-based combination therapy and rapid diagnostic test. K A Elmardi, E M Malik, T Abdelgadir, S H Ali, A H Elsyed, M A Mudather, A H Elhassan, I Adam, Malar J. 839Elmardi KA, Malik EM, Abdelgadir T, Ali SH, Elsyed AH, Mudather MA, Elhassan AH, Adam I: Feasibility and acceptability of home-based management of malaria strategy adapted to Sudan's conditions using artemisinin-based combination therapy and rapid diagnostic test. Malar J 2009, 8:39.
Implementation of Home based management of malaria in children reduces the work load for peripheral health facilities in a rural district of Burkina Faso. A B Tiono, Y Kaboré, A Traoré, N Convelbo, F Pagnoni, S B Sirimba, Malar J. 7201Tiono AB, Kaboré Y, Traoré A, Convelbo N, Pagnoni F, Sirimba SB: Implementation of Home based management of malaria in children reduces the work load for peripheral health facilities in a rural district of Burkina Faso. Malar J 2008, 7:201.
Teaching mothers to provide home treatment of malaria in Tigray, Ethiopia: a randomised trial. G Kidane, R H Morrow, Lancet. 356Kidane G, Morrow RH: Teaching mothers to provide home treatment of malaria in Tigray, Ethiopia: a randomised trial. Lancet 2000, 356:550-555.
Deploying artemether-lumefantrine with rapid testing in Ethiopian communities: impact on malaria morbidity, mortality and healthcare resources. H Lemma, P Byass, A Desta, A Bosman, G Costanzo, L Toma, E Fottrell, A C Marrast, Y Ambachew, A Getachew, N Mulure, A Morrone, A Bianhi, G A Barnabas, Trop Med Int Health. 15Lemma H, Byass P, Desta A, Bosman A, Costanzo G, Toma L, Fottrell E, Marrast AC, Ambachew Y, Getachew A, Mulure N, Morrone A, Bianhi A, Barnabas GA: Deploying artemether-lumefantrine with rapid testing in Ethiopian communities: impact on malaria morbidity, mortality and healthcare resources. Trop Med Int Health 2010, 15:241-250.
Impact of home-based management of malaria on health outcomes in Africa: a systematic review of the evidence. H Hopkins, A Talisuna, C J Whitty, S G Staedke, Malar J. 6134Hopkins H, Talisuna A, Whitty CJ, Staedke SG: Impact of home-based management of malaria on health outcomes in Africa: a systematic review of the evidence. Malar J 2007, 6:134.
Coping with paediatric referral-Ugandan parents' experience. S Peterson, J Nsungwa-Sabiiti, W Were, X Nsabagasani, G Magumba, J Nambooze, G Mukasa, Lancet. 363Peterson S, Nsungwa-Sabiiti J, Were W, Nsabagasani X, Magumba G, Nambooze J, Mukasa G: Coping with paediatric referral-Ugandan parents' experience. Lancet 2004, 363:1955-1956.
Factors constraining adherence to referral advice for severely ill children managed by the Integrated Management of Childhood Illness approach in Imbabura Province. H D Kalter, R Salgado, L H Moulton, P Nieto, A Contreras, M L Egas, R E Black, Acta Paediatr. 92Kalter HD, Salgado R, Moulton LH, Nieto P, Contreras A, Egas ML, Black RE: Factors constraining adherence to referral advice for severely ill children managed by the Integrated Management of Childhood Illness approach in Imbabura Province, Ecuador. Acta Paediatr 2003, 92:103-110.
Improving malaria recognition, treatment and referral practices by training caretakers in rural Nigeria. T A Okeke, J Biosoc Sci. 42Okeke TA: Improving malaria recognition, treatment and referral practices by training caretakers in rural Nigeria. J Biosoc Sci 2010, 42:325-339.
Improving childhood malaria treatment and referral practices by training patent medicine vendors in rural south-east Nigeria. T A Okeke, B S Uzochukwu, Malar J. 8260Okeke TA, Uzochukwu BS: Improving childhood malaria treatment and referral practices by training patent medicine vendors in rural south-east Nigeria. Malar J 2009, 8:260.
Achieving child survival goals: potential contribution of community health workers. A Haines, D Sanders, U Lehmann, A K Rowe, J E Lawn, Jan S Walker, D G Bhutta, Z , Lancet. 369Haines A, Sanders D, Lehmann U, Rowe AK, Lawn JE, Jan S, Walker DG, Bhutta Z: Achieving child survival goals: potential contribution of community health workers. Lancet 2007, 369:2121-2131.
From research to national expansion: 20 years' experience of communitybased management of childhood pneumonia in Nepal. P Dawson, Y Pradhan, R Houston, S Karki, D Poudel, S Hodgins, Bull World Health Organ. 86Dawson P, Pradhan Y, Houston R, Karki S, Poudel D, Hodgins S: From research to national expansion: 20 years' experience of community- based management of childhood pneumonia in Nepal. Bull World Health Organ 2008, 86:339-343.
Can community health workers and caretakers recognise pneumonia in children? Experiences from western Uganda. K Kallander, G Tomson, X Nsabagasani, J N Sabiiti, G Pariyo, S Peterson, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 10010Kallander K, Tomson G, Nsabagasani X, Sabiiti JN, Pariyo G, Peterson S: Can community health workers and caretakers recognise pneumonia in children? Experiences from western Uganda. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2006, 100(10):956-963.
Community case management of fever due to malaria and pneumonia in children under five in Zambia: a cluster randomized controlled trial. K Yeboah-Antwi, P Pilingana, W B Macleod, K Semrau, K Siazeele, P Kalesha, B Hamainza, P Seidenberg, A Mazimba, L Sabin, K Kamholz, D M Thea, D H Hamer, PLoS Med. 71000340Yeboah-Antwi K, Pilingana P, Macleod WB, Semrau K, Siazeele K, Kalesha P, Hamainza B, Seidenberg P, Mazimba A, Sabin L, Kamholz K, Thea DM, Hamer DH: Community case management of fever due to malaria and pneumonia in children under five in Zambia: a cluster randomized controlled trial. PLoS Med 2010, 7:e1000340.
Use and limitations of malaria rapid diagnostic testing by community health workers in war-torn Democratic Republic of Congo. M Hawkes, J P Katsuva, C K Masumbuko, Malar J. 8308Hawkes M, Katsuva JP, Masumbuko CK: Use and limitations of malaria rapid diagnostic testing by community health workers in war-torn Democratic Republic of Congo. Malar J 2009, 8:308.
Assessing the quality of service of village malaria workers to strengthen community-based malaria control in Cambodia. J Yasuoka, K C Poudel, K Poudel-Tandukar, C Nguon, P Ly, D Socheat, M Jimba, 10.1186/1475-2875-10-94Malar J. 9109Yasuoka J, Poudel KC, Poudel-Tandukar K, Nguon C, Ly P, Socheat D, Jimba M: Assessing the quality of service of village malaria workers to strengthen community-based malaria control in Cambodia. Malar J 2010, 9:109. doi:10.1186/1475-2875-10-94
Low referral completion of rapid diagnostic test-negative patients in community-based treatment of malaria in Sierra Leone. Thomson, Malaria Journal. 1094Cite this article asCite this article as: Thomson et al.: Low referral completion of rapid diagnostic test-negative patients in community-based treatment of malaria in Sierra Leone. Malaria Journal 2011 10:94.
. Thomson, Malaria Journal. 10Thomson et al. Malaria Journal 2011, 10:94 http://www.malariajournal.com/content/10/1/94


1841654:Barriers to community case management of malaria in Saraya, Senegal: training, and supply-chains


Background

Community case management of malaria (CCMm) consists of treating patients with prepackaged anti-malarial drugs that are distributed by members of their own community. This study examines a CCMm programme that relies on rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) for diagnosis and artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) for treatment in the district of Saraya, south-eastern Senegal. It assesses the programme's acceptance by communities in Saraya, the effectiveness of the lay health worker training, and the availability of supplies in the field.
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates global malaria incidence in 2010 at 216 million cases, of which 81% were in Africa [1]. In the same year, mortality due to malaria is estimated to be from 655,000 to 1,238,00 deaths, 91% of which occurred in Africa and the majority among children under 5 years of age [1,2]. Many of these deaths also occurred in rural areas where there is sparse health infrastructure [3][4][5].
In 2005, Senegal's national malaria control programme reported that malaria accounted for 28% of mortality in health facilities and was the single largest contributor to documented mortality [6]. Plasmodium falciparum accounts for the vast majority of infections, with fewer cases of Plasmodium ovale and Plasmodium malariae [7]. Deaths from malaria in Senegal are projected to have increased over three-fold between 1980 and 2000 (4,888 to 15,125 deaths) due to increasing population size, and to have decreased by over a third between 2000 and 2010 (15,125 to 10,150 deaths), likely due to intensified prevention and treatment efforts [2].
Community case management of malaria (previously known as home management of malaria) consists of a lay health worker with no formal health training providing malarial diagnostic or therapeutic care outside of a formal health care establishment [8]. The WHO recommends that CCMm be implemented in areas where a health facility is not accessible to the majority of people within 24 hours of illness onset [1]. As of 2010, 42 countries, including Senegal, have implemented some form of CCMm with RDTs [1]. Several studies have shown that CCMm is qualitatively acceptable to communities or providers [9][10][11][12][13]. Some researchers have assessed cure rates including a Ghana-, Nigeria-, and Uganda-based study that found greater than 90% parasitological cure rates in all sites where CCMm had been implemented [11]. Despite these positive findings, other authors have raised concerns about CCMm. Some have questioned the ability of lay health workers who need but cannot afford eyeglasses to read RDTs correctly [14] based on a high rate of untreated ophthalmologic conditions in sub-Saharan Africa [15,16]. Others have pointed out that the wide implementation of CCMm programmes is expensive and could accelerate the emergence of resistance to ACT [14]. There is also controversy around the impact of CCMm programmes on morbidity or mortality, with a Cochrane Review identifying only one randomized control CCMm trial showing a decrease in mortality (Ethiopia) [17,18]. Despite these concerns, CCMm with RDTs and ACT is endorsed by the WHO and widely accepted in areas where malaria is endemic and there is sparse health infrastructure [1].
Senegal's national malaria control programme introduced ACT (artesunate-amodiaquine) as first-line treatment for uncomplicated malaria in 2006. In 2007, it began offering RDTs in most health centres, health posts, and operational health huts nationally [19]. A recent study found that the prescription of ACT decreased from 73% to 32% of all malaria-like febrile illnesses three years after RDTs had been introduced [19].

Methods


Study area

The study site is located in Saraya, a district in southeastern Senegal that borders Mali and Guinea. The population is estimated at over 34,000, with a density of seven persons per square kilometre. Malaria is seasonally holoendemic in Saraya with highest incidence in the rainy season (June to November) [20].

Community participants in the study

The study included two groups of lay health workers: a group of community health workers (CHWs) or agents de santé communautaires, and a group of community medicine distributors (CMDs), or distributeurs de soins à domicile. Each CHW works in a village with a functional health hut, which is a basic local health care facility in a village without a clinic. The CMDs work in villages without health huts. Of note, unlike the CHWs, the CMDs are trained only to manage uncomplicated malaria and are not permitted by the ministry of health to manage any other condition.

Drugs and test used

The CCMm programme used loose-dose artesunateamodiaquine ACT and the Paracheck Pf W RDT. This study assessed the functioning of the CCMm programme in Saraya through the following qualitative and quantitative methods: 1) Focus groups with villagers in CCMm villages, 2) pre-and post-training questionnaires with CMDs, and 3) post-training questionnaires with CHWs two months after their training. The study was originally designed to assess both the CHWs and CMDs with pre-and post-training questionnaires; however, weather, road conditions, and feasibility constraints prevented the research team from conducting pre-and posttraining questionnaires for the CHWs limiting their evaluation to a post-training assessment. Although a deviation from the original research design, the different CHW and CMD assessment methods made possible an assessment of different aspects of the CCMm programme, specifically short-term knowledge gain from the training (the CMD pre-and post-training questionnaires), and long-term retention of that knowledge (CHW post-training assessment).

Focus groups

Six focus groups were carried out in villages where the CCMm programme had already begun and selected participants through convenience sampling after meeting with the village chief and included any adult villagers willing and available to participate at the time of the visit to their village. The focus groups explored two predetermined domains: community priorities with respect to malaria, and local perceptions of the CCMm programme.

Selection of lay health workers

The CHWs and CMDs were selected to participate in the CCMm programme independent of and prior to the initiation of the research study. Communities chose the CHWs to run the health hut in their villages, whereas village leaders chose the CMDs for the express purpose of the CCMm programme.

Lay health worker trainings

Representatives of the national malaria programme designed and led the trainings in French and a local CHW translated into Malinké. The trainings lasted three days and included five modules, each of which included lectures, question-and-answer sessions, role-playing, and job-aids. Subjects included the aetiology of malaria, signs and symptoms, high-risk group identification, behaviour change, and the programme protocol. The CHWs and CMDs were trained in May and August 2009 respectively.

CMD assessment

The national malaria control programme wrote the 10item CMD pre-and post-training questionnaire. The research team administered the questionnaire to all 26 CMDs who participated in the training. The questionnaire assessed three domains: 1) Their understanding of the transmission and prevention of malaria, 2) its clinical presentation, and 3) their understanding of the CCMm protocol. Because six CMDs could not read or write, a designated CHW translator helped them complete the questionnaire.

CHW assessment

The research team designed two questionnaires to assess the training of the CHWs. One questionnaire assessed the functioning of the CCMm programme at the CHW health huts, and the other assessed CHW knowledge of information taught in the CCMm programme training. The surveys were based on themes that emerged in the focus groups and piloted them with district health staff. The difference in the evaluation tools for CMDs and CHWs was a consequence of unforeseen poor weather and road conditions, which forced the research team to deviate from their original plan of carrying out pre-and post-training questionnaires for both groups of lay health workers.

Data management

The focus group moderator collected qualitative data by taking notes of themes and quotes that emerged during focus groups. The quantitative data was collected on written surveys and entered into a Microsoft W Excel file and stored on a hard drive with password protection.

Data analysis

The research team analyzed the qualitative data (focus groups) using the constant comparisons analytic process and in-vivo codes based on grounded theory methodology [21]. Basic data analysis was carried out with MS Excel W , and statistical analysis with SPSS W . The analysis of the 10-item questionnaire administered to the CMDs to compare pre-and post-training scores was done with paired T-tests. The CHW and CMD groups were not compared due to different baseline levels of training and to the different assessment methods.

Ethical considerations

The Institutional Review Board of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai approved this research (reference number: 09-0925) as being in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration. Local community approval was also obtained for this study. Oral informed consent was obtained for all lay health worker questionnaires and surveys.

Results


Qualitative findings

Six focus groups with 42 total participants with approximately equal numbers of men and women participants were performed (Table 1). Four major themes emerged in the community priorities domain: medication and RDT shortages or stock-outs, transportation difficulties with inability to complete referrals made by CHWs, community control, and problems accessing health posts. All groups cited barriers to transportation and referral completion due to poor roads and distance as the primary barrier to the CCMm programme. The quotation by a 45-year-old gentleman illustrates this common complaint. Five focus groups cited ACT stock-outs as a major weakness. Most participants emphasized community control in fighting malaria, including consulting traditional healers (three groups), and community prevention with insecticide-treated nets and the burning of local plants to deter mosquitoes (five groups). One focus group also complained of insufficient health personnel and facilities and a high cost of care ( Figure 1). With regards to community perceptions of the CCMm programme, participants expressed both skepticism and confidence in the CCMm programme as illustrated by the following quotation by a 60 year-old village woman,
"We are doubtful that it will work because we have been told that many programs like this will happen in the past, but they often never end up happening."
Whereas an elderly gentlemen felt that, "Progress can be made in the community's fight against malaria. Look at Guinea Worm and how the community got rid of that."

Quantitative findings

Both CHWs and CMDs were predominantly male and young adults (Table 1).

CMD pre-and post-training questionnaires

Twenty-six CMDs participated in the training and all completed a written pre-and a post-training 10-question evaluation ( Table 2). The mean overall score on this evaluation rose from 52% before the training to 73% after (p = 0.02), and the proportion of CMDs who attained a score indicating that they understood and could carry out the protocol rose from 52% to 75% (p < 0.01). An increase in the proportion of CMDs able to recognize the clinical presentation of malaria was not statistically significant (37% vs. 47%, p = 0.21).

CHW health hut questionnaire

The main findings were that RDTs and ACT had expired or run out in most villages, that CHWs generally kept accurate patient logs and that all CHWs performed malaria tests free of charge and sold treatment at the price set by the health ministry, as stipulated by the CCMm protocol (Table 2).

CHW knowledge questionnaires

While most CHWs answered most questions correctly, only half could correctly explain the programme's referral algorithm even when showed the visual depiction of the algorithm. For no topic did more than about three quarters of CHWs answer all questions correctly. Areas where the greatest number of CHWs answered correctly included transmission of malaria by mosquitoes, correct identification of signs and symptoms of complicated and uncomplicated malaria, correct identification of infants and pregnant women as most vulnerable groups, and of insecticide-treated nets as a prevention measure (Table 3).

Discussion

This qualitative and quantitative study has three principal findings with regards to acceptation of the CCMm programme by local communities, training of lay health workers, and the functioning of the CMMm programme in the field.

Community perceptions of CMD programmes

First, communities in CCMm villages generally felt that the programme meets a real need by increasing access to RDTs and ACT, but expressed concerns that it will not solve the challenges of transporting patients that often make it difficult or impossible to complete referrals made by lay health workers. It is important to note that the challenge of transportation is an inherent limitation of any CCMm programme in a remote setting and cannot be addressed without major infrastructure improvements. This is in contrast to other aspects of malaria control such as lay health worker training and supply chain management, that are inherent components of CCMm and that can be improved to optimize the functioning of the programme as discussed below. A second major qualitative theme that emerged from the focus groups was the importance of community control in efforts against malaria through traditional modalities and prevention efforts including insecticidetreated nets. Other analyses of community acceptance of CCMm programmes have also found appreciation by communities due to increased proximity of care and decreased cost [9][10][11]. One multi-site feasibility study found that communities criticized CCMm programmes for lack of lay health worker training, and that lay health workers are not compensated for their work [11], although these concerns were not voiced in this study's focus groups.

Lay health worker training

This study's second major finding concerns the effectiveness of the lay health worker training, which was evaluated in two ways: through pre-and post-training questionnaires of CMDs, and on-site post-training questionnaires of CHWs. Although the differing evaluation mechanisms preclude any comparison of the CMDs and CHWs, they do allow for a short-and long-term evaluation of the lay health workers knowledge. In the short term, pre-and post-training questionnaires among CMDs demonstrated significant improvement in scores. This is consistent with a study in Laos, which found a less than 2% RDT interpretation error rate by lay health workers one year after a one-hour training [22]. A Zambia-based study similarly found lay health workers performed RDTs with 90% accuracy and with 93% correct result interpretation after a three-hour training assisted by visual job aids and RDT package inserts [14].
Although the CMDs' scores improved statistically after training, this score cannot be correlated with field performance. This is highlighted by results of the CHW questionnaire performed in the field two months after their training, which showed that half of the CHWs could not interpret the RDT algorithm correctly and almost half could not prescribe ACT correctly. In fact, none of the women CHWs who had been trained in the CCMm programme were able to correctly interpret the RDT algorithm or prescribe ACT in the field on the post-training questionnaire. This is likely due to the fact that few women CHW participated in the CCMm programme in their villages after they were trained. The low number of women participating in the CCMm programme could have implications for the success of the programme as women (mothers) were the providers  of care in the only CCMm randomized trial to have shown a statistically significant mortality decrease [17,18]. The CHWs performed well in other areas including knowledge of the aetiology of malaria, identifying its signs and symptoms, identifying infants and pregnant women as highest risk groups, and insecticide-treated nets as a prevention measure. Poor performance in the CHW post-training questionnaire included identification of foreigners as high-risk, and of removing standing water and debris, intermittent preventative treatment, and early treatment as important prevention measures.

Availability of supplies

Finally, the assessment of CCMm functioning in the field revealed that ACT and RDTs had not been available since soon after the CHWs had completed their training two months prior to the assessment. The cause of the stock-out was not determined, however the programme manager in Saraya indicated that supplies were not available from the regional pharmacy and that the district health centre was not distributing ACT or RDTs to lay health workers as they then would not have enough supplies for the district health center. Recent assessments of ACT availability in other African countries have found similar evidence of wide-spread stock-outs [23][24][25]. A study of anti-malarial availability in six-African countries found rates of ACT stock-outs among CHWs ranging between 20% to 70%, although the authors do not provide a reason for the shortages [23]. A Malawi-based study identified a three-month per year stock-out of anti-malarial medications in eight centrally located government health centres that it attributed to inaccurate record-keeping and ignored supply requests [25]. Two Kenya-based studies documented ACT stockouts due to procurement system failures and inadequate central stores, although the authors do not specify what caused these problems [24,26]. The Global Fund has implemented an initiative to increase the availability of ACT, the Affordable Medicines Facility, but that does not include Senegal in its first phase of implementation [27]. This initiative focuses on distribution within countries as well as production and may provide insight on how to increase the availability of ACT in other countries including Senegal. Although the findings of this study are limited to Saraya, they highlight the need for further investigation into the frequency, prevalence, and causes of stock-outs in Senegal.

Limitations

The chief limitation of this study is that no medical outcome was measured. While the chief goal of any anti-malaria programme must be to reduce malaria, the incidence, prevalence and mortality of malaria in Saraya were unknown both before and after the implementation of the CCMm programme. Monitoring such outcomes would require the design and creation of an epidemiologic monitoring and reporting system in Saraya. Other variables which could be of interest to observe in an evaluation of a CCMm programme that were not measured in this study include time from malarial symptom onset to first dose of treatment, morbidity and mortality changes due to reduction in the misdiagnosis of other febrile childhood illnesses as malaria, and days of work lost due to clinic visits.
Another major limitation is the different evaluation tools used to assess the CMDs and CHWs. The original study design was to evaluate both groups of lay health workers with pre-and post-training questionnaires; however, weather and resulting poor road conditions prevented the research team from being present at the CHW training. Further feasibility constraints precluded visiting the CMDs two months after their training to assess long-term knowledge retention, as was done with the CHWs. Although a major limitation of this study, the two different evaluation tools have the advantage of representing both short-and longer-term assessment of the training's effectiveness.
Finally, regarding the evaluations of CHW knowledge and performance, two caveats are in order. First, the CHWs knew they were being evaluated during the surveys, which may have influenced their behaviour and responses. Second, the CMDs were evaluated with written pre-and post-test questionnaires even though several of them were illiterate and required assistance from CHWs.

Conclusion

Modeling suggests that there has been a significant decrease in malaria mortality in Senegal over the past ten years possibly associated with intensive malaria control efforts including increased access to ACT and RDTs through CCMm programmes [2]. This study assessed the acceptability and functioning of a CCMm programme in the field in a single district in Saraya, Senegal. It found generally good acceptance by communities due to perceived increased access to malarial treatment. It also found that although most lay health workers acquired necessary knowledge and skills through the training, a sizeable minority was unable to correctly interpret the RDT algorithm or prescribe ACT several months after their training. It also found that women CHWs few women were trained in the CCMm programme and those who were trained subsequently did not participate in their villages. Finally, this study found that three quarters of CCMm sites had stock-outs of RDTs and two thirds had stock-outs of ACT two months after the initiation of the programme due to a regional shortage. This study's findings are limited to the district of Saraya, but highlight important considerations for CCMm programmes in general including CHW training, and supply chain management.

"

The nurse at the health post blames us peasants for bringing in patients late, but how can we carry a sick person on our head for 15 kilometres? [. . .] The whole problem is that if a child is sick [. . .] or if a woman is pregnant and sick -you can't carry her on your back either. How can you bring them to the health post? [. . .] This is very, very hard -especially if the river and swamp is overflowing. Then you simply have to put your life in god's hands and stay at home."

Figure 1

1Focus groups major themes.

Table 1

1Participant demographicsTotal 
n
Gender n (%) 
Mean 
age 
Female 
Male
Focus groups 
Villagers 
42 
18 (43%) 
24 (57%) 
43
Surveys 
CHWs 
26 
5 (19%) 
21 (81%) 
31
CMDs 
26 
2 (8%) 
24 (92%) 
28

Table 2

2Community medicine distributer pre-and post-training questionnaire scoresPre-training score 
Post-training score 
P-value

Table 3

3Community health worker assessmentField visits. n = 19
http://www.malariajournal.com/content/12/1/95
AcknowledgementsThis study was made possible through funding from The Carol L. Kuckein Alpha Omega Alpha Student Research Fellowship, and the Infectious Disease Society of America Medical Scholars Program to Demetri A. Blanas.AbbreviationACT: Artemisinin-based combination therapy; CCMm: Community case management of malaria; CHWs: Community health workers; CMDs: Community medicine distributors; RDTs: Rapid diagnostic tests; WHO: World Health Organization.Competing interestsThe authors have no competing interests to declare.Authors' contributions DB, YN, and NH conceived and designed the study conception and carried out the data analysis and interpretation. DB and YN designed the research tools and conducted the site visits, focus groups, and administered the surveys. AJ, AS, MM, and KN made substantive contributions to data interpretation, and were integrally involved in revising the manuscript. NH also gave final approval for publication of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Geneva: World Health Organization. WHO: World Malaria Report. WHO: World Malaria Report. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2011.
Global malaria mortality between 1980 and 2010: a systematic analysis. C J Murray, L C Rosenfeld, S S Lim, K G Andrews, K J Foreman, D Haring, N Fullman, M Naghavi, R Lozano, A D Lopez, Lancet. 379Murray CJ, Rosenfeld LC, Lim SS, Andrews KG, Foreman KJ, Haring D, Fullman N, Naghavi M, Lozano R, Lopez AD: Global malaria mortality between 1980 and 2010: a systematic analysis. Lancet 2012, 379:413-431.
Malaria transmission in urban sub-Saharan Africa. V Robert, K Macintyre, J Keating, J F Trape, J B Duchemin, M Warren, J C Beier, AmJTrop Med Hyg. 68Robert V, Macintyre K, Keating J, Trape JF, Duchemin JB, Warren M, Beier JC: Malaria transmission in urban sub-Saharan Africa. AmJTrop Med Hyg 2003, 68:169-176.
Risk factors for presentation to hospital with severe anaemia in Tanzanian children: a case-control study. E Kahigwa, D Schellenberg, S Sanz, J J Aponte, J Wigayi, H Mshinda, P Alonso, C Menendez, Trop Med Int Health. 7Kahigwa E, Schellenberg D, Sanz S, Aponte JJ, Wigayi J, Mshinda H, Alonso P, Menendez C: Risk factors for presentation to hospital with severe anaemia in Tanzanian children: a case-control study. Trop Med Int Health 2002, 7:823-830.
Incidence and management of malaria in two communities of different socio-economic level. R B Biritwum, J Welbeck, G Barnish, Ann Trop Med Parasitol. 94Biritwum RB, Welbeck J, Barnish G: Incidence and management of malaria in two communities of different socio-economic level, in Accra, Ghana. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2000, 94:771-778.
Dakar: Senegalese National Health Information Service. SNIS: Statistical Annuary. SNIS: Statistical Annuary 2004. Dakar: Senegalese National Health Information Service; 2005:56-70.
Geneva: World Health Organization. WHO: World Malaria Report. WHO: World Malaria Report. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2008.
Community case management of childhood illnesses: policy and implementation in Countdown to 2015 countries. A De Sousa, K E Tiedje, J Recht, I Bjelic, D H Hamer, Bull World Health Organ. 90de Sousa A, Tiedje KE, Recht J, Bjelic I, Hamer DH: Community case management of childhood illnesses: policy and implementation in Countdown to 2015 countries. Bull World Health Organ 2012, 90:183-190.
Feasibility and acceptability of ACT for the community case management of malaria in urban settings in five African sites. P Akweongo, P Agyei-Baffour, M Sudhakar, B N Simwaka, A T Konate, P B Adongo, E N Browne, A Tegegn, D Ali, A Traoré, M Amuyunzu-Nyamongo, F Pagnoni, G Barnish, Malar J. 10240Akweongo P, Agyei-Baffour P, Sudhakar M, Simwaka BN, Konate AT, Adongo PB, Browne EN, Tegegn A, Ali D, Traoré A, Amuyunzu-Nyamongo M, Pagnoni F, Barnish G: Feasibility and acceptability of ACT for the community case management of malaria in urban settings in five African sites. Malar J 2011, 10:240.
Feasibility and acceptability of home-based management of malaria strategy adapted to Sudan's conditions using artemisinin-based combination therapy and rapid diagnostic test. K A Elmardi, E M Malik, T Abdelgadir, S H Ali, A H Elsyed, M A Mudather, A H Elhassan, I Adam, Malar J. 839Elmardi KA, Malik EM, Abdelgadir T, Ali SH, Elsyed AH, Mudather MA, Elhassan AH, Adam I: Feasibility and acceptability of home-based management of malaria strategy adapted to Sudan's conditions using artemisinin-based combination therapy and rapid diagnostic test. Malar J 2009, 8:39.
Feasibility and acceptability of artemisinin-based combination therapy for the home management of malaria in four African sites. I O Ajayi, E N Browne, B Garshong, F Bateganya, B Yusuf, P Agyei-Baffour, L Doamekpor, A Balyeku, K Munguti, S Cousens, F Pagnoni, Malar J. 76Ajayi IO, Browne EN, Garshong B, Bateganya F, Yusuf B, Agyei-Baffour P, Doamekpor L, Balyeku A, Munguti K, Cousens S, Pagnoni F: Feasibility and acceptability of artemisinin-based combination therapy for the home management of malaria in four African sites. Malar J 2008, 7:6.
Feasibility and acceptability of the use of artemether-lumefantrine in the home management of uncomplicated malaria in children 6-59 months old in Ghana. A M Chinbuah, J O Gyapong, F Pagnoni, E K Wellington, M Gyapong, Trop Med Int Health. 11Chinbuah AM, Gyapong JO, Pagnoni F, Wellington EK, Gyapong M: Feasibility and acceptability of the use of artemether-lumefantrine in the home management of uncomplicated malaria in children 6-59 months old in Ghana. Trop Med Int Health 2006, 11:1003-1016.
Health service providers in Somalia: their readiness to provide malaria case-management. A M Noor, I A Rage, B Moonen, R W Snow, Noor AM, Rage IA, Moonen B, Snow RW: Health service providers in Somalia: their readiness to provide malaria case-management.
. Malar J. 8100Malar J 2009, 8:100.
Improving community health worker use of malaria rapid diagnostic tests in Zambia: package instructions, job aid and job aid-plus-training. S A Harvey, L Jennings, M Chinyama, F Masaninga, K Mulholland, D R Bell, Malar J. 7160Harvey SA, Jennings L, Chinyama M, Masaninga F, Mulholland K, Bell DR: Improving community health worker use of malaria rapid diagnostic tests in Zambia: package instructions, job aid and job aid-plus-training. Malar J 2008, 7:160.
Impact of presbyopia on quality of life in a rural African setting. I Patel, B Munoz, A G Burke, A Kayongoya, W Mchiwa, A W Schwarzwalder, S K West, Opthalmology. 113Patel I, Munoz B, Burke AG, Kayongoya A, McHiwa W, Schwarzwalder AW, West SK: Impact of presbyopia on quality of life in a rural African setting. Opthalmology 2006, 113:728-734.
Population-based study of presbyopia in rural Tanzania. A G Burke, I Patel, B Munoz, A Kayongoya, W Mchiwa, A W Schwarzwalder, S K West, Opthalmology. 113Burke AG, Patel I, Munoz B, Kayongoya A, McHiwa W, Schwarzwalder AW, West SK: Population-based study of presbyopia in rural Tanzania. Opthalmology 2006, 113:723-727.
Lay health workers in primary and community health care. S A Lewin, J Dick, P Pond, M Zwarenstein, Aja G Van Wyk, B Bosch-Capblanch, X Patrick, M , Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 1Lewin SA, Dick J, Pond P, Zwarenstein M, Aja G, van Wyk B, Bosch- Capblanch X, Patrick M: Lay health workers in primary and community health care. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005, 1:1-207. CD004015.
Teaching mothers to provide home treatment of malaria in Tigray, Ethiopia: a randomized trial. G Kidane, R Morrow, Lancet. 356Kidane G, Morrow R: Teaching mothers to provide home treatment of malaria in Tigray, Ethiopia: a randomized trial. Lancet 2001, 356:550-555.
Major reduction in anti-malarial drug consumption in Senegal after nation-wide introduction of malaria rapid diagnostic tests. S Thiam, M Thior, Faye B Ndiop, M Diouf, M L Diouf, M B Diallo, I Fall, F B Ndiaye, J L Albertini, A Lee, E Jorgensen, P , Gaye O Bell, D , e18419. 20Geneva: World Health Organization. 627WHO: World Malaria ReportThiam S, Thior M, Faye B, Ndiop M, Diouf ML, Diouf MB, Diallo I, Fall FB, Ndiaye JL, Albertini A, Lee E, Jorgensen P, Gaye O, Bell D: Major reduction in anti-malarial drug consumption in Senegal after nation-wide introduction of malaria rapid diagnostic tests. PLoS One 2011, 6:e18419. 20. WHO: World Malaria Report 2010. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010:27. 27.
Strategies for Qualitative Data Analysis. J Corbin, A Strauss, Basics of qualitative research. Knight VThousand Oaks, California: SageCorbin J, Strauss A: Strategies for Qualitative Data Analysis. In Basics of qualitative research, 3e. Edited by Knight V. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage; 2008:65-86.
An assessment of the use of malaria rapid tests by village health volunteers in rural Laos. M Mayxay, P N Newton, S Yeung, T Pongvongsa, S Phompida, R Phetsouvanh, N J White, Trop Med Int Health. 9Mayxay M, Newton PN, Yeung S, Pongvongsa T, Phompida S, Phetsouvanh R, White NJ: An assessment of the use of malaria rapid tests by village health volunteers in rural Laos. Trop Med Int Health 2004, 9:325-329.
Got ACTs? Availability, price, market share and provider knowledge of anti-malarial medicines in public and private sector outlets in six malaria-endemic countries. K A O&apos;connell, H Gatakaa, S Poyer, J Njogu, I Evance, Munroe E Solomon, T Goodman, C Hanson, K Zinsou, C Akulayi, L Raharinjatovo, J Arogundade, E Buyungo, P Mpasela, F Adjibabi, C B Agbango, J A Ramarosandratana, B F Coker, B Rubahika, D Hamainza, B Chapman, S Shewchuk, T Chavasse, D , Malar J. 10326O'Connell KA, Gatakaa H, Poyer S, Njogu J, Evance I, Munroe E, Solomon T, Goodman C, Hanson K, Zinsou C, Akulayi L, Raharinjatovo J, Arogundade E, Buyungo P, Mpasela F, Adjibabi CB, Agbango JA, Ramarosandratana BF, Coker B, Rubahika D, Hamainza B, Chapman S, Shewchuk T, Chavasse D: Got ACTs? Availability, price, market share and provider knowledge of anti-malarial medicines in public and private sector outlets in six malaria-endemic countries. Malar J 2011, 10:326.
The magnitude and trend of artemether-lumefantrine stock-outs at public health facilities in Kenya. R K Sudoi, S Githinji, A Nyandigisi, A Muturi, R W Snow, D Zurovac, Malar J. 1137Sudoi RK, Githinji S, Nyandigisi A, Muturi A, Snow RW, Zurovac D: The magnitude and trend of artemether-lumefantrine stock-outs at public health facilities in Kenya. Malar J 2012, 11:37.
Deficient supplies of drugs for life threatening diseases in an African community. N N Lufesi, M Andrew, I Aursnes, BMC Health Serv Res. 786Lufesi NN, Andrew M, Aursnes I: Deficient supplies of drugs for life threatening diseases in an African community. BMC Health Serv Res 2007, 7:86.
Malaria drug shortages in Kenya: a major failure to provide access to effective treatment. B B Kangwana, J Njogu, B Wasunna, S V Kedenge, D N Memusi, C A Goodman, D Zurovac, R W Snow, AmJTrop Med Hyg. 80Kangwana BB, Njogu J, Wasunna B, Kedenge SV, Memusi DN, Goodman CA, Zurovac D, Snow RW: Malaria drug shortages in Kenya: a major failure to provide access to effective treatment. AmJTrop Med Hyg 2009, 80:737-738.
Affordable medicines facility -malaria. 10.1186/1475-2875-12-95Affordable medicines facility -malaria. http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/ amfm/. doi:10.1186/1475-2875-12-95
Barriers to community case management of malaria in Saraya, Senegal: training, and supply-chains. Blanas, Malaria Journal. 1295Cite this article asCite this article as: Blanas et al.: Barriers to community case management of malaria in Saraya, Senegal: training, and supply-chains. Malaria Journal 2013 12:95.


18750996:Community case management of malaria using ACT and RDT in two districts in Zambia: achieving high adherence to test results using community health workers


Background

Access to prompt and effective treatment is a cornerstone of the current malaria control strategy [1]. Delays in starting appropriate treatment is a major contributor to malaria mortality. Many children with suspected malaria in sub-Saharan Africa, where medical services are not easily accessible, start treatment too late or do not receive it at all and die at home without contact with formal medical services [2,3]. It is for this reason that the World Health Organization has recommended home management of malaria (HMM) as one of the strategies for improving access to prompt and effective malaria case management [4]. Further, community referral compliance rates observed in some studies indicate the possibility detecting malaria episodes early, initiating prehealth facility management of cases and improving outcomes of severe malaria cases at health facility [5].
Home management of malaria with chloroquine has been effective in reducing both mortality and severe malaria morbidity [6,7]. However, due to parasite resistance to monotherapies, the use artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) in HMM is being promoted and has shown great potential of being used safely in the community. The feasibility and acceptability of the use of ACT within the context of HMM has been demonstrated in Ghana [8] and in a multi-centre study involving four African sites [9]. Furthermore, scaling-up of the HMM strategy has been shown to reduce workload in health facilities [10] and might thus contribute to minimize the consequences of workforce shortage at peripheral health facilities level, and possibly improve their performance In Zambia, the first line malaria treatment policy was changed from chloroquine to the combination artemether-lumefantrine (AL) due to parasite resistance to monotherapies [11]. However, at community level, community health workers (CHWs) are still using sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) for treating uncomplicated malaria. SP has showed decreasing efficacy rates with treatment failures estimated to be 30% [12]. CHWs play a big role in the provision of very basic health services in areas with geographical access challenges and where there is a shortage of professional health workers in rural areas [13,14]. Within the context of the health system in Zambia, the community level is defined as the level that 'brings health care as close to the family as possible' (National Health Strategic Plan 2006-2010). In malaria control, CHWs are expected to promote ITNs and other preventive measures such as environmental management, provide individual counselling and group education, detect cases of fever and pregnancy, provide simple case management and prophylaxis, and know when to refer in all cases and circumstances [15].
Having successfully reached countrywide coverage up to facility level, plans are underway to incorporate the community level as a service delivery point for malaria case management using ACT and RDTs on a national scale. It is against this background that this pilot study was conducted to generate information on the capacity of CHWs to use RDTs and ACT as effective tools for HMM. It was anticipated that results from this study could inform policy on the feasibility and effectiveness of a large scale HMM programme implemented using CHWs. An important component of the above objective was to assess whether this model would achieve good anti-malarial prescription practices in relation to the diagnostic test results for malaria.

Methods

This was a prospective evaluation of the home management of malaria by CHWs using RDT and ACT. The study was conducted in two districts, which had baseline data on the home management of malaria practices and acceptability. Chongwe district is located in Lusaka Province of Zambia. The area is typically rural and experiences moderate malaria transmission. The district is estimated to have a population of about 157,664 inhabitants. There are 26 health facilities in the district, annual malaria incidence was estimated at 130/1000 population in 2008 (HMIS 2007). Kalomo district on the other hand is situated in the Southern Province of Zambia. The district has a population of about 181,379 people. The district has 24 health facilities and the annual malaria incidence was estimated to at 82/1000 population [16]. Both districts are implementing the user fees removal policy (thus patients are not expected to pay any fees for the basic health care package).
Originally the study was designed for children under five years, however, all age groups sought care through the CHWs models in line with the national health care system. CHWs act as first level contact in hard to reach areas (accessibility). Therefore, the project captured all age groups attended to by the CHWs. The sample included all cases reporting to the CHWs in the study sites between June 2008 and December 2009. The study period covered both high and low transmission seasons.
Initially, the CHWs and health facility staff who were in the study sites received standard training on malaria case management based on the national guidelines on the new malaria treatment policy. The trainings were tailored for CHWs and health facility staff respectively. The trainings included practical sessions on how to perform malaria testing using RDTs and how to interpret the results. Additional training included stock management and infection prevention. Emphasis was placed on using the diagnostic result to inform the decision whether to prescribe an anti-malarial or not for uncomplicated malaria, referral mechanisms for severe malaria cases and non-malaria febrile cases.
Malaria registers were developed for use by CHWs to collect morbidity and mortality data. This was a basis for records review regarding completeness, workload, diagnostic results and number of cases managed or referred. The CHWs were oriented on how to fill the registers to ensure completeness of records.

Diagnostic testing

For this study, the HRP-2 antigen based RDT, specific for Plasmodium falciparum was used at all study sites in line with the national stocks. The parasitological profile data collected by the malaria programme have shown no occurrence of other forms of malaria, either single or as mixed infections, in both Chongwe and Kalomo districts (NMCC 2008 unpublished). The cases were managed based on the CHW algorithm for fever (NMCC 2004 unpublished) and the RDT job aids. Training on RDT use was conducted prior to the study. Quality assurance mechanisms were put in place, both retrospectively and prospectively, to ensure the RDT tests were functioning properly but also to ensure the tests were being performed correctly.

Pre-packed anti-malarial

The current malaria drug policy in Zambia is the use of a six-dose AL, as a combination treatment for uncomplicated malaria. The drug is co-formulated and copackaged. CHWs in Zambia have been trained on the new malaria treatment policy. Further training was provided prior to the commencement of the study on how to prescribe AL.

Record reviews

Record reviews were conducted based on the documentation available in the registers provided to CHWs and health facility staff. A health facility and CHWs checklist was used to collect data on fever/malaria cases, confirmatory test result, treatment options and outcome of treatment including referrals.

Focus group discussion and in-depth interviews

In all about 10 focus group discussions (FGDs) were conducted in the study areas. Although extensive field notes were taken during interviews, all interviews were recorded and transcribed. FGDs were conducted among care-takers, health facility personnel and CHWs. In depth interviews were also conducted with care-takers and CHWs.

Field observations

The field observations were performed to address the feasibility of CHWs to correctly use the job aids for RDTs, which were developed to assist with use and interpretation of results. This was to provide insights for improving upon future versions of job aids and also contribute to assessing the applicability of written RDT instructions for CHWs use. Other objectives of field observations were to identify the capacity of CHWs to correctly administer ACT to patients in whom malaria was diagnosed, and their ability to identify signs and symptoms of uncomplicated and severe malaria.

Data analysis

The quantitative surveys data was entered in excel and analysed using STATA version 8. For the qualitative study, data was analysed by themes and sub-themes using the grounded theory approach. Data was organized to detect themes, codes and contents.

Ethical consideration

Ethical approval was obtained from the Tropical Disease Research Ethics Committee. Further clearance was obtained from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health.

Consent

Written informed consent was obtained from the study participants. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Results


Number and proportion of patients visiting CHWs

Patient visits at the two study sites showed that between June 2008 and December 2009, a total of 9,847 fever cases were seen by CHWs on the study. The number of fever cases seen by CHWs was 5648 in Chongwe and 4199 in Kalomo. Not all the fever cases however were found to have malaria, as shown in Table 1. There were more female patients than were males in both districts. This is consistent with the ZDHS 2007 estimates which show that the Zambian population has more females than males (52% vs 48%) respectively [17].
In Chongwe district, the proportion of fever cases found to have malaria was 4.5% (257/5648) while in Kalomo malaria prevalence was very high at 49.1% (2061/ 4199). The diagnostic tool used in both district was an HRP-2 based RDT. HRP-2 based RDTs, when used in high parasite prevalence regions, have a tendency of overestimating the disease burden by approximately 10% [18]. This phenomenon is an important aspect of the test because it reduces the probability of missing a true positive malaria case and hence does not pose a danger if a negative case for malaria is not treated with antimalarial. However, this may delay investigation and alternative treatment in non-malaria febrile cases that are erroneously considered as malaria. In Chongwe all the patients were subjected to an RDT test, while in Kalomo 3% were clinically diagnosed to have malaria, due to a short period of RDT stock-out.
The malaria prevalence in Kalomo was found be high compared to Chongwe and also well above the national average for 2008 and 2010 malaria indicator surveys (10% and 16%) respectively. The malaria prevalence across villages in the same district was found to be varied as shown in Table 2.
From Table 1, 35% of the catchment population was seen by CHWs in Chongwe district while only 23% sought care through the CHWs in Kalomo. In both districts, the villages served by CHWs are not very close to the health facility. All CHWs in Kalomo were males while in Chongwe, two out of nine were female. All CHWs who were in this study were found to have attained up to secondary level education and they were all above 35 years old.

Antimalarial prescription patterns

The CHWs were trained only to prescribe anti-malarials to confirmed malaria cases and refer other non-malaria patients to the nearest health facility for further management. In order to do this, CHWs were required to screen the patients with fever or history of fever using their algorithm for patient management. When the RDTs was negative and other casue of illness was suspected, the patient was then referred to the nearest heath facility so that appropriate tests and treatment could be provided.
For cases not needing referral, according to the CHWs assessments, the most common prescriptions were pain killers, multivitamins or de worming tablets.
In Chongwe, all malaria patients (positive RDT result) were treated with AL. No anti-malarial was prescribed to cases with negative RDT. In Kalomo, among the positive cases, 99.2% received the drug of choice AL while 0.8% were treated with SP. A few cases (0.6%) with negative RDT were treated with AL. The practice observed here is consistent with the guidelines on good case management and shows that CHWs, if well trained and monitored, coupled with the use of job aids, are able to correctly use and interpret RDTs and appropriately prescribe ACT.
All the CHWs reported no stockouts of the first-line treatment. However, in Kalomo district, there was stock out of RDTs for less than two weeks in May 2009.
During the field observations and by reviewing records and matching the anti-malarial dosage with the patient age, it was found that all CHWs were able to prescribe the pre packaged anti-malarial correctly. This is also corroborated by the findings above where anti-malarials were nearly exclusively prescribed to those who were found to be carrying malaria parasites as opposed to any fever case.
This adherence to the test result is the best ever malaria case management practice reported in Zambia even among professional health workers. The nonadherence to RDT results is a major issue in malaria case management in the country [19,20]. The training and supervision model used in this programme coupled with quality assurance systems and continuous availability of the testing tool has the potential to improve adherence to diagnostic test results and overall malaria case management. This has spill over effects to good patient management in general through provision of the appropriate alternative treatment either by CHW or at health facility.

Proportion of cases seen by CHWs progressing to severe malaria

Malaria, if diagnosed early and promptly treated with an effective drug can neither progress to severe malaria nor lead to death. In this study, all the 20 severe malaria cases were referred to the health facility. And to assess progress of the patients, all reviews were conducted within 3 days of commencing treatment to ensure that no false negatives were left untreated. However, in this study, no false negatives were found. This is consistent   [21]. At the end of the study no severe malaria cases were reported in patients initially diagnosed as uncomplicated malaria at all the sites. The only severe malaria cases reported were those identified at the screening process (12 in Chongwe and 8 in Kalomo) and these were referred to the health facility for treatment with quinine as per national treatment guidelines. The differences in the rate of severe malaria reported in the districts may be due to differences in prevalence.

Ability of the CHWs to use the referral mechanisms

The CHWs catchment area is linked to the health facility under which they fall. The health facility provides logistics and supplies for the routine work of the CHWs. In the project model, CHWs were obtaining drugs and RDTs through the health facilities. The health facilities were trained on supervision and feedback mechanisms for referrals from CHWs.
Of the 735 referrals sent for further management to the health facility in Kalomo district, CHWs received feedback for 40% of the patients. In Chongwe district, feedback was provided to CHWs for 42% of the 80 patients referred. However, this is the proportion confirmed to have actually reached the health facility by health centre staff through a written note. During the FGDs, CHWs reported that health workers do not always provide written feedback for referrals sent to them. This leads to work overload for CHWs who have to do home visits to ensure that all the referred patients went to their place of referral.
The referral system could be more effective if the twoway communication system is maintained by both CHWs and health workers.

Capacity of health workers to supervise CHWs drug and logistics

The logistics system for CHWs for this project was based on an existing system where limited supplies for two weeks were issued by the health centre staff. A simple logistics form of issues and receipt was maintained and that was used by both parties when new requests were made.
During the study, it was found that health workers were able to ensure that no stock outs occurred. The only stock outs which occurred for RDTs in Kalomo district (less than two weeks) was due to a shortage in the whole district and not at health centre level. The health centre staff were trained through the project on drug and logistics management including supervisions of CHWs.
In Chongwe, all but one CHW reported receiving monthly supervisory visits. In Kalomo, the supervisory visits by health workers were reported to take have taken place once every quarter (four times in a year). In Chongwe district, three CHWs were invited to work at the health facility under the supervision of the health centre staff to ensure that they were complying with the patient management requirements. This approach however was not liked by CHWs, as they felt that they were manning health centres at the expense of them providing care in their home villages.

Discussion

Access to effective and timely diagnosis and treatment for malaria within 24 hours of symptom onset is a key intervention in malaria control efforts. It must, however, be noted that the low specificity of presumptive diagnosis has implications for the deployment of ACT at the community level hence the need for deployment of parasite based diagnostic tools in tandem with ACT deployment [22]. The study endeavoured to demonstrate the viability of using CHWs as service delivery points for malaria case management using HRP-2 based RDTs and ACT. Over the 18 months of the study, CHWs attended to patients of all ages and sexes indicating that communities use these individuals for health care delivery. In Chongwe CHWs attended to an estimated 35% of the catchment population, while Kalomo had 23%. The majority of the patients were children under the age of five. As these are patients that might have sought care from the health facilities, our study confirms the potential of the HMM strategy to reduce the case load of patients at the health facilities, as previously indicated by other studies [23,10].
The CHWs were found to adhere to established guidelines for malaria diagnosis and treatment. From the study only 0.6% of the patients received treatment for a negative RDT result. However all the CHWs prescribed the dosages correctly. This is consistent with other findings on the ability of CHWs to manage uncomplicated malaria within their communities [24]. The demonstrated adherence to the test results in this study is the best ever malaria case management practice reported in Zambia even among professional health workers. The non-adherence to RDT results is major issue in malaria case management in the country [19,20]. The training and supervision model used in this programme coupled with quality assurance systems and continuous availability of the testing tool has the potential to improve adherence to diagnostic test results and overall malaria case management. This has spill over effects to good patient management in general. A challenge that was observed from this study is that of patient demands, where CHWs reported that some patients still demanded anti-malarial treatment in spite of a negative RDT result. Thus, information on confirmatory malaria diagnosis should not be limited to health personnel or workers only but should be extended to the general population.
During the study no deaths were reported. This corroborates the finding that all the severe malaria cases which were identified by CHWs at the screening process were referred to the health facility as per training guidelines. The relatively low caretaker compliance rate with the referral advice is a matter of concern. However, the rate of 40-42% may be underestimated due to the source of information (written feedback). During FGDs, the CHWs reported that not all health workers provided written feedback, thereby making it difficult for the CHWs to correctly estimate the number of referrals who complied with the advice given to them. During FGDs, it was found that some care-takers did not like to be referred to the health facilities because of long waiting hours and long distances in some cases. The CHWs also commented on the fact that health centre staff were not consistent in providing the CHWs with specific patient feedback after receiving referrals. This shifts the workload to CHWs who have to do home visits to ensure that all the referred patients went to their place of referral. The referral system could be more effective if the two-way communication system is maintained by both CHWs and health workers and more patient education is done on the importance of complying with the referral advice.
There are variations with regard to parasite rates detected by CHWs and during the different months of the year. The parasite rates variations may be due to variations in locations of the villages across each district. This has implications in overall malaria control as this shows that control efforts should be focal and take into account the factors that lead to malaria transmisiion in each of the villages in a given district.
The key health concerns expressed by the CHWs included malaria, HIV/AIDS, diarrhoea, coughs and eye infections. The study did not rank these from the respondents perspective, however for all excluding malaria, CHWs said they could not do much to help their communities because they did not have the required tools for treatment. It is, therefore, important to consider the idea of integrated community case management (iCCM), which aims to empower CHWs with skills and tools to manage more ailments at a commmunity level.
All the CHWs received training on use of RDTs and ACT. During the training they were taught the signs and symptoms of malaria, which on assessment a year later they could remember very well. This confirms that a lay healthworker trained in a systematic and simple manner can retain information about how a disease may manifest and be able to provide appropriate treatment. All the CHWs had job aids for ACT and RDTs, which they indicated they used occasionally during their work. The RDT job aids which were provided were translated into the major local languages. However, all CHWs said they were comfortable using the English version.
The CHWs also showed ability to manage the stocks of commodities; no RDTs or ACT expired during the study period. A brief RDT stock out was experienced by the CHWs due to a national stockout of RDTs. Additionally, all the CHWs were able to track the use of their commodities and make orders for restocking in a timely manner.
The care givers exhibited a fair understanding of the symptoms of malaria and the prevention methods. In addition they were able to articulate the methods for fever management. Caregivers indicated that they had challenges with access to health facilities due to staff shortages, and that they were happy with the services provided by the CHWs. This is indicative of the need/ demand for services offered by the CHWs, as close to the home as possible. Caregivers were asked about their perception of services rendered by CHWs. It was generally agreed that people were happy with the services, and the way they were being delivered by the CHWs. The attitude of CHWs was described as "perfect" because they were reported to be committed to attending to patients. The high care taker acceptability of CHWs may also be attributed to the fact that the community members are the ones who recommend a given individual to be trained by health centre personnel to work as a CHW.
The CHW initiative is cardinal to improving health service delivery systems [13,14]. The study has shown that this strategy is feasible, acceptable by communities and effective for malaria case management. In order for the intitaive to work, there is need to ensure the availability of commodities required by the CHWs to test and treat malaria at all times. Furthermore, even though the CHWs have been working as volunteers, there is need to provide sustainable incentives for their work due to the fact that the number of patients they see increases when they are able to offer more health services. Additionally, there were some patients that had fever but did not have malaria and these where refered for further management to the health facility. In order to provide more comprehensive health services the concept of community case management needs to be further developed, CHWs to be able to diagnose and treat various uncomplicated ailments such as diarrhoea and pneumonia especially in children. There is also need to develop mechanisms to improve the refferral system between the CHW and health facility.
Further implementation research is required to develop effective referral mechanisms in HMM. There is also alot more work required to understand the impact of HMM startegy on non-malaria fever outcomes and also to understand how to improve the caretaker adherence to referral advice.

Conclusion

The study showed that community case management of malaria by CHWs using RDTs and ACT is feasible, acceptable by the communities and efficient. CHWs were able to manage appropriately malaria related fever episodes, including referral of cases for further management at the health facility. The CHWs adhered to the RDT result and only prescribed anti-malarials to cases with parasitological confirmation. The adherence to RDT test result found in this study was found to be the best practice reported in the country so far. This model has thus the potential to improve malaria case management and lead to cost savings by reducing over prescription of anti-malarials. It has also the potential to improve overall disease management, since it provides an opportunity for non-malaria patients to be investigated for other causes of fever. However, referral mechanisms need strengthening to ensure that nonmalaria fevers get the appropriate treatment they need timely.
Scaling up malaria case management with ACT and RDTs coupled with intensified training and supervision has the potential to improve malaria case management in the remote parts of Zambia.

Table 1

1Characteristics and outcomes of patients visiting CHWsCharacteristics 
Chongwe 
N (%)
Binomial Exact 95% 
CI
Kalomo 
N (%)
Binomial Exact 95% 
CI
No of CHWs evaluated 
9 
7
Catchment population for CHWs 
16,079 
18,279
Number of patient visits 
5648 
(35.1%)
[34.4-35.9] 
4199 
(23.0%)
[22.4-23.6]
Sex:
Male 
2547 
(45.1%)
[43.8-46.4] 
1864 
(44.4%)
[42.9-45.9]
Female 
3101 
(54.9%)
[53.6-56.2] 
2335 
(55.6%)
[54.1-57.1]
Number with positive RDT (with or without signs of severe 
malaria)
257 (4.5%) 
[4.0-5.1] 
2061 
(49.1%)
[47.6-50.6]
Number with signs of severe malaria at first contact 
12 (4.7%) 
[2.4-8.0] 
8 (0.4%) 
[0.2-0.8]
Uncomplicated malaria cases treated with AL 
245 (100%) [98.5-100] 
2037 
(99.2%)
[98.7-99.6]
Uncomplicated malaria cases treated with SP 
0 (0%) 
-
16 (0.8%) 
[0.4-1.2]
Cases with negative RDT treated with antimalarial 
0 (0%) 
-
13 (0.6%) 
[0.3-1.1]
Number of malaria deaths at CHW 
0 
0
Number of referrals to health facility for further management 
80 
735
Number confirmed to have reached referral 
34 (42%) 
[31.5-54.1] 
294 (40%) 
[36.4-43.6]

Table 2

2Parasite rates (%) by CHWChongwe 
Kalomo
CHW1 
17.5 
55.1
CHW2 
3.5 
55.8
CHW3 
0.5 
59.7
CHW4 
0.4 
74.4
CHW5 
1.0 
31.6
CHW6 
2.3 
4.2
CHW7 
3.6 
31.1
CHW8 
1.3
CHW9 
2.6
Acknowledgements and FundingThe funding for this study was made possible through the WHO-TDR funding for implementation research, project code A70170. We would like to acknowledge the Ministry of Health, both at the NMCP and at headquarters, for approving the study and facilitating timely release of funds. We also appreciate the efforts of the district staff and research assistants who worked tirelessly to ensure the study was a success. We finally want to acknowledge the in kind support from the World Bank COMBOR programme for the bicycles, community health worker bags and lab coats for CHWs in Chongwe district.Authors' contributions PC was responsible for the proposal development, study administration, data analysis and manuscript development. BH, MH and VC participated equally in proposal development, data collection, data entry and analysis and manuscript development. FP provided invaluable input at proposal development, data analysis and manuscript development. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Childhood mortality among users and non-users of primary health care in a rural west African community. J P Velema, E M Alihonou, T Gandaho, F H Hounye, Int J Epidemiol. 20Velema JP, Alihonou EM, Gandaho T, Hounye FH: Childhood mortality among users and non-users of primary health care in a rural west African community. Int J Epidemiol 1991, 20:474-479.
Ministry of Health Tanzania: The Adult Morbidity and Mortality Project. Dar es Salaam, MoH, AMMP project. Ministry of Health Tanzania: The Adult Morbidity and Mortality Project. Dar es Salaam, MoH, AMMP project 2004.
World Health Organization: Scaling up home-based management of malaria: from research to implementation. Geneva: SwitzerlandWorld Health Organization: Scaling up home-based management of malaria: from research to implementation Geneva: Switzerland; 2004.
Stefan Peterson S: Community referral in home management of malaria in western Uganda: A case series study. K Källander, G Tomson, J Nsungwa-Sabiiti, Y Senyonjo, G Pariyo, BMC Int Health Hum Rights. 62Källander K, Tomson G, Nsungwa-Sabiiti J, Senyonjo Y, Pariyo G, Stefan Peterson S: Community referral in home management of malaria in western Uganda: A case series study. BMC Int Health Hum Rights 2006, 6:2.
Teaching mothers to provide home management of malaria in Tigray, Ethopia: a randomized trial. G Kidane, R H Morrow, Lancet. 356Kidane G, Morrow RH: Teaching mothers to provide home management of malaria in Tigray, Ethopia: a randomized trial. Lancet 2000, 356:550-555.
Early treatment of childhood fevers with pre-packed antimalarial drugs in the home reduces severe malaria morbidity in Burkina Faso. S B Sirima, A Konaté, A B Tiono, Convelbo Cousens, S Pagnoni, F , Trop Med Int Health. 8Sirima SB, Konaté A, Tiono AB, Convelbo Cousens S, Pagnoni F: Early treatment of childhood fevers with pre-packed antimalarial drugs in the home reduces severe malaria morbidity in Burkina Faso. Trop Med Int Health 2003, 8:133-139.
Feasibility and acceptability of the use of artemether-lumefantrine in the home management of uncomplicated malaria in children 6-59 months old in Ghana. A M Chinbuah, J O Gyapong, F Pagnoni, E K Wellington, M Gyapong, Trop Med Int Health. 11Chinbuah AM, Gyapong JO, Pagnoni F, Wellington EK, Gyapong M: Feasibility and acceptability of the use of artemether-lumefantrine in the home management of uncomplicated malaria in children 6-59 months old in Ghana. Trop Med Int Health 2006, 11:1003-1016.
Feasibility and acceptability of artemisinin-based combination therapy for the home management of malaria in four African sites. I O Ajayi, E N Browne, B Garshong, F Bateganya, B Yusuf, P Agyei-Baffour, L Doamekpor, A Balyeku, K Munguti, S Cousens, F Pagnoni, Malar J. 76Ajayi IO, Browne EN, Garshong B, Bateganya F, Yusuf B, Agyei-Baffour P, Doamekpor L, Balyeku A, Munguti K, Cousens S, Pagnoni F: Feasibility and acceptability of artemisinin-based combination therapy for the home management of malaria in four African sites. Malar J 2008, 7:6.
Implementation of Home based management of malaria in children reduces the work load for peripheral health facilities in a rural district of Burkina Faso. A B Tiono, Y Kaboré, A Traoré, N Convelbo, F Pagnoni, S B Sirima, Malar J. 7201Tiono AB, Kaboré Y, Traoré A, Convelbo N, Pagnoni F, Sirima SB: Implementation of Home based management of malaria in children reduces the work load for peripheral health facilities in a rural district of Burkina Faso. Malar J 2008, 7:201.
A cost-effectiveness analysis of artemether lumefantrine for treatment of uncomplicated malaria in Zambia. P Chanda, F Masiye, B M Chitah, S Naawa, H B Moonga, P Banda, T Okorosobo, Malar J. 621Chanda P, Masiye F, Chitah BM, Naawa S, Moonga HB, Banda P, Okorosobo T: A cost-effectiveness analysis of artemether lumefantrine for treatment of uncomplicated malaria in Zambia. Malar J 2007, 6:21.
Assessment of the therapeutic efficacy of artemether-lumefantrine (Coartem ® ) and sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP)-artesunate in Zambian children. P Chanda, C H Sikaala, W Kapelwa, H Moonga, E Njunju, M Macdonald, D Thea, D H Hamer, N Sipilanyambe, 53rd Annual Meeting of the Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. Miami, FLAbstract 213Chanda P, Sikaala CH, Kapelwa W, Moonga H, Njunju E, Macdonald M, Thea D, Hamer DH, Sipilanyambe N: Assessment of the therapeutic efficacy of artemether-lumefantrine (Coartem ® ) and sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP)- artesunate in Zambian children. 53rd Annual Meeting of the Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 2004, Miami, FL. Abstract 213.
Achieving child survival goals: potential contribution of community health workers. A Haines, D Sanders, U Lehmann, A K Rowe, J E Lawn, Jan S Walker, D G Bhutta, Z , Lancet. 369Haines A, Sanders D, Lehmann U, Rowe AK, Lawn JE, Jan S, Walker DG, Bhutta Z: Achieving child survival goals: potential contribution of community health workers. Lancet 2007, 369:2121-31.
Community participation: lessons for maternal, newborn, and child health. M Rosato, G Laverack, H Grabman, P Tripathy, N Nair, C Mwansambo, K Aza, J Morrison, Z Bhutta, H Perry, S Rifkin, A Costello, Lancet. 372Rosato M, Laverack G, Grabman H, Tripathy P, Nair N, Mwansambo C, Aza K, Morrison J, Bhutta Z, Perry H, Rifkin S, Costello A: Community participation: lessons for maternal, newborn, and child health. Lancet 2008, 372:962-971.
National Malaria Control Centre: Roll Back Malaria Strategic Plan 2001-2005 Central Board of Health, Zambia. National Malaria Control Centre: Roll Back Malaria Strategic Plan 2001-2005 Central Board of Health, Zambia; 2001.
Ministry of Health: Annual Health Statistics Bulletin, Health Management Information System. Lusaka, ZambiaMinistry of Health: Annual Health Statistics Bulletin, Health Management Information System 2007 Lusaka, Zambia; 2007.
. Zdhs, ZDHS. 2007.
Plasmodium falciparum parasite infection prevalence from a household survey in Zambia using microscopy and a rapid diagnostic test: implications for monitoring and evaluation. J Keating, J M Miller, A Bennet, H B Moonga, T P Eisele, Acta Trop. 112Keating J, Miller JM, Bennet A, Moonga HB, Eisele TP: Plasmodium falciparum parasite infection prevalence from a household survey in Zambia using microscopy and a rapid diagnostic test: implications for monitoring and evaluation. Acta Trop 2009, 112:277-282.
Paediatric malaria case management with artemetherlumefantrine in Zambia: a repeat cross sectional study. D Zurovac, M Ndhlovu, N Sipilanyambe, Chanda P Hamer, D H Simon, J L Snow, R W , Malar J. 631Zurovac D, Ndhlovu M, Sipilanyambe N, Chanda P, Hamer DH, Simon JL, Snow RW: Paediatric malaria case management with artemether- lumefantrine in Zambia: a repeat cross sectional study. Malar J 6:31.
Improved Diagnostic Testing and Malaria Treatment Practices in Zambia. D H Hamer, M Ndhlovu, D Zurovac, M Fox, K Yeboah-Antwi, Chanda P Naawa, S Simon, J L Snow, R W , JAMA. 297Hamer DH, Ndhlovu M, Zurovac D, Fox M, Yeboah-Antwi K, Chanda P, Naawa S, Simon JL, Snow RW: Improved Diagnostic Testing and Malaria Treatment Practices in Zambia. JAMA 2007, 297:2227-2231.
Early results of integrated malaria control and implications for the management of fever in under-five children at a peripheral health facility: a case study of Chongwe rural health centre in Zambia. P Chanda, B Hamainza, S Mulenga, V Chalwe, C Msiska, E Chizema-Kawesha, Malar J. 849Chanda P, Hamainza B, Mulenga S, Chalwe V, Msiska C, Chizema-Kawesha E: Early results of integrated malaria control and implications for the management of fever in under-five children at a peripheral health facility: a case study of Chongwe rural health centre in Zambia. Malar J 2009, 8:49.
An assessment of accuracy of mothers' presumptive diagnosis of fever at home in southwest Nigeria: evidence for switch to parasite-based diagnostic test. I O Ajayi, C O Falade, O O Kale, East Afr J Public Health. 6Ajayi IO, Falade CO, Kale OO: An assessment of accuracy of mothers' presumptive diagnosis of fever at home in southwest Nigeria: evidence for switch to parasite-based diagnostic test. East Afr J Public Health 2009, 6:229-234.
. Chanda , Malaria Journal. 10Chanda et al. Malaria Journal 2011, 10:158 http://www.malariajournal.com/content/10/1/158
Deploying artemether-lumefantrine with rapid testing in Ethiopian communities: impact on malaria morbidity, mortality and healthcare resources. H Lemma, P Byass, A Desta, A Bosman, G Costanzo, L Toma, E Fottrell, A Marrast, Y Ambachew, A Getachew, N Mulure, A Morrone, A Bianchi, G A Barnabas, Trop Med Int Health. 15Lemma H, Byass P, Desta A, Bosman A, Costanzo G, Toma L, Fottrell E, Marrast A, Ambachew Y, Getachew A, Mulure N, Morrone A, Bianchi A, Barnabas GA: Deploying artemether-lumefantrine with rapid testing in Ethiopian communities: impact on malaria morbidity, mortality and healthcare resources. Trop Med Int Health 2010, 15:241-250.
Impact of home-based management of malaria on health outcomes in Africa: a systematic review of the evidence. H Hopkins, A Talisuna, Jmc Whitty, S G Staedke, 10.1186/1475-2875-10-158Malar J. 6134Hopkins H, Talisuna A, Whitty JMC, Staedke SG: Impact of home-based management of malaria on health outcomes in Africa: a systematic review of the evidence. Malar J 2007, 6:134. doi:10.1186/1475-2875-10-158
Community case management of malaria using ACT and RDT in two districts in Zambia: achieving high adherence to test results using community health workers. Chanda , Malaria Journal. 10158Cite this article asCite this article as: Chanda et al.: Community case management of malaria using ACT and RDT in two districts in Zambia: achieving high adherence to test results using community health workers. Malaria Journal 2011 10:158.


30384887:Feasibility of home management using ACT for childhood malaria episodes in an urban setting


Introduction

Over 90% of malaria cases occur in Sub-Saharan Africa, where nearly all deaths due to the disease occur in children under 5 years of age. 1 Every 30 seconds, a child under 5 years dies of malaria in Sub-Saharan Africa. 2 Malaria, which was believed to be a disease of rural areas in Africa, is gradually emerging as a new phenomenon in the urban area. 3 In Sub-Saharan Africa, urban malaria has been recognized in Yaoundé, Lagos, Accra, Kumasi, Dar es Salam, and many other cities. 4,5 In these cities, the prevalence of malaria is highest among the poorer sections of the population. Some contributing factors include poor sanitation, poor housing, environmental degradation, and urban agriculture.
A number of studies have shown that the majority of families in Sub-Saharan Africa treat malaria at home, but that treatment is often incomplete or inadequate. 1 In response to this malaria problem, a package of interventions for the home management of uncomplicated malaria (HMM) in children under 5 years, developed and tested through multicountry studies in Nigeria, 6,7 Kenya, 8,9 and Burkina Faso, 10,11 and found to be effective for control of the disease, was recommended by the Roll Back Malaria initiative of the World Health Organization (WHO) to scale up the fight against this disease. 12 However, all the previous studies used chloroquine, which is now obsolete, hence the need to produce evidence on the feasibility, acceptability, and safety of HMM using artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT, comprising amodiaquine + artesunate).
Reviews of research conducted to understand people's perception and treatment of fever, the primary symptom of simple malaria and other childhood illnesses, 13,14 have established that acute febrile illness tends to be managed hierarchically, with initially convenience and cheaper options dominating before other alternatives are explored. Convulsions, which indicate severe malaria, tend to be perceived as a different disease with a separate etiology. [15][16][17][18] With the malaria risk unevenly distributed across urban environments, 19 interventions must be preceded by identification and prioritization of the most vulnerable, ie, children under 5 years. Despite the fact that access to quality health care is better on average in urban than in rural zones, formal public health facilities are often the last sources of treatment used along the pathway to care. 19 In addition, in the urban areas, there is a lower predictive value of fevers (20%-25%) compared with the rural zones, where fever is assumed to be malaria. 19 In Cameroon, the prevalence of malaria is estimated at 8%, 20 but this may be an underestimation because the actual prevalence is not known. Malaria transmission in the country is all year round and the disease is a serious public health problem, accounting for 40%-45% of medical consultations, 57% of hospitalization days, and 40% of mortality among children under 5 years. 21 In the country, more than 50% of fevers are treated at home. 22 Studies by Nsagha et al 23 have shown that whereas home management of malaria in Cameroon is very common, knowledge of the treatment dosage for malaria is poor. Einterz and Bates 24 noted that 87% of patients and caretakers of children in Northern Cameroon have a poor ability to recognize fever. Knowing how to deploy ACT best at the community level as part of HMM is important. There is a need to test all children presenting with fever for malaria using a rapid diagnostic test before giving treatment, to avoid wastage of expensive ACT. High attrition rates for drug distributors have been recorded in some HMM strategies in Africa. 25 There is a need to explore the possibility of introducing a nominal cost for ACT as an incentive to drug distributors. This study will help us to understand the community perception and response to childhood malaria episodes in an urban setting.
In response to the malaria burden, the Cameroonian Ministry of Public Health has developed a kit for HMM as a major component which is not yet fully operational, so a rapid diagnostic test is not used. To strengthen the rationale for use of antimalarials in the home, we explored the use of ACT for HMM in children under 5 years in an urban setting. This study was carried out to provide data on the feasibility of HMM in urban settings with respect to the baseline situational analysis of beliefs and practices in health-seeking behavior and drug use among community members, map sources for identification of the most suitable distribution channels for ACT, determine the acceptability of rapid diagnostic testing to confirm malaria in children under 5 years, and determine if a nominal cost for a rapid diagnostic test for malaria would be acceptable at the community level in the HMM strategy and an acceptable incentive for community drug distributors to perform well.

Materials and methods


Project area

The study took place in the Bonassama health district in the city of Douala in the Littoral Province (now called Region) of Cameroon in 2006. The population of Douala is about 1.5 million, organized into six health districts. Douala is a flat, swampy area with a lot of stagnant water and garbage cans that act as breeding sites for mosquitoes. The housing conditions in the town are generally poor, with the well submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress being the main source of water. The inhabitants of Douala come from most of the over 250 ethnic groups in Cameroon and also from other countries with different sociocultural backgrounds. Many of the inhabitants participate in artisan jobs, small trading, or hawking, or are unemployed, with few having salaried jobs. The area contains many small trading and artisan shops. The climate is made up of two distinct seasons, ie, a long rainy season from March to September and a short dry season from October to February. Temperatures can vary from 25°C in the rainy season to about 32°C in the dry season. Malaria is the main mosquito-borne disease in the locality and, as such, is a public health problem of primary importance. The six health districts of Douala include Bonassama, Deido, Nylon, Log Baba, Cité des Palmiers, and New Bell. The Bonassama health district is separated from the other five health districts by the River Wouri that empties into the Atlantic Ocean. This health district is a marshy, swampy, hot, humid region divided into 12 health areas. In order to carry out this research, the Bonassama health district was divided into two different areas based on the main road that passes through the health district. The coastal industrial area where the district hospital is located is the center, with the outskirts considered as the "periphery", and in between are the "intermediate/residential" areas. While this classification bears no relationship to the administrative zones, it was relevant for us in terms of conducting the qualitative survey effectively.

Qualitative exploratory techniques

This exploratory research combined a range of qualitative methods, whereby multiple techniques were used for data collection. The multiple techniques included a participatory approach and cross-cultural consultations with district medical officers, chiefs of health centers, health personnel, traditional rulers, and members of dialog structures. This strategy enabled the triangulation of data to capture the study variables. A range of variables were investigated, comprising beliefs and knowledge about malaria in the community, health-seeking behavior for malaria in children younger than 5 years, perception of rapid diagnostic testing and prepackaged ACT, preferred communication channels, role of the community in supporting HMM, and motivation of community drug distributors.

Selection methods for focus group discussions and in-depth interviews

Fifteen focus group discussions and 20 in-depth interviews (Table 1) were conducted using a guide to gather information on the major themes of the study. One hundred and eighteen people from different sociodemographic backgrounds participated in the focus group discussions and 20 in the in-depth interviews. Selection of the participants was based on occupation, role in home care for children under 5 years, location within the health area, age, gender, place of work, and type of health care provider. There were 68 women and 50 men. The participants in the focus group discussions were purposively chosen, in which minigroups of 4-8 and 9 -12 people were drawn from the target population [26][27][28] and discussed topics on HMM. The groupings were based on the age, gender, occupation, literacy, and social status of participants. Direct interviews were conducted in Pidgin English, English language, or French language and, in some cases, with the help of a trained interpreter. There was a moderator and note taker in all the focus group discussions. All the focus group discussions and in-depth interviews were recorded on audiocassette tapes. The purpose of taping the interviews was explained to the participants and their consent was obtained before this was done. The notes and replayed cassettes were transcribed after the interviews.

Ethical clearance and administrative procedures

Ethical clearance for this study was obtained from the National Ethics Committee of the Ministry of Public Health, Yaoundé, Cameroon, and the WHO Ethics Committee in Geneva. After a preliminary introduction of the study to administrative, traditional, and public health officials of Douala City to seek their support, the Bonassama health district was selected and the ethical clearance was presented to management. The purpose of the study and its advantages for children's health were explained, and questions raised by the staff were answered. Participants were asked to give their consent before the commencement of focus group discussions and in-depth interviews. Each participant was free to continue or abandon the process at his or her convenience. It was agreed that the identities of the participants would be concealed during the research process, analysis, and reporting.

Sample size and selection

The judgment sampling method was used in selecting the study participants. The participants were purposively selected to ensure that operationalization of the study variables was consistent for all participants. This is an appropriate sampling technique for the selection of a few cases for intensive studies in life history research. The sample size consisted of submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress 78 participants who took part in focus group discussions of 4-8 members and 60 participants of 9-12 members selected from a number of categories, including mothers younger than 24 years, mothers older than 24 years, old women, men, community health workers, community health workers, community guides, caregivers, opinion leaders, pharmacists, shopkeepers, chemical sellers, nongovernment organization leaders, private clinics/hospital operators, and health managers (Table 1). Twenty participants also took part in the in-depth interviews.

Conducting focus group discussions and in-depth interviews

We started by categorizing participants for focus group discussions/in-depth interviews into the groups cited earlier.
Through the assistance of community guides (who were identified and selected by community health dialog structure members), we identified participants for focus group discussions and in-depth interviews. The addresses of participants and their telephone contact numbers were taken, and they were subsequently invited for focus group discussion at the Bonassama health district hospital. Key informants for indepth interviews were met at their residences.
During focus group discussions/in-depth interviews, there was a moderator, a note taker, and a person for tape recording the discussions. Participants for focus group discussions/ in-depth interviews were purposively selected to represent the two sections of the study area. At the end of each focus group discussion/in-depth interview, each cassette was labeled and stored in an envelope bearing the same label and the booklets of note takers to avoid confusion during translation.

Typing and transcription of qualitative data

After typing of the focus group discussions/in-depth interviews, they were given coded names, and each focus group discussion/in-depth interview was saved under a specific folder as a separate file. Taped interviews were handed over to secretaries who participated in the data collection process for transcription. Each transcribed focus group discussion/ in-depth interview bore the name labeled on the envelope and cassette. Transcription was done verbatim and Pidgin/ French interviews were translated into the English language. Typing of focus group discussions/in-depth interviews was done immediately after translation. The typing was carried out both by secretaries who participated in the transcription and other secretaries who were hired for the purpose.

Development of code tree and analyses of qualitative data

We created a code tree for the qualitative data analysis. This structure handled all the themes of the study. A branch In some cases, a branch was divided into sub-branches or codes, corresponding to subthemes. In this case, each branch or subbranch handled a code. All qualitative data of the same theme were assembled under a code representing that theme.

Coding qualitative data

Sections of qualitative data were read and copied into the branches of the code tree that represented the themes. After all focus group discussions/in-depth interviews had been thoroughly treated following this procedure, each theme with its corresponding data were retrieved, read, and similar ideas were grouped separately. Common comments are presented in quotation marks in this paper.

Results


Community perception of malaria

Malaria in the Bonassama health district was perceived very differently by different categories of persons. Female caregivers, community guides, and nurses were of the opinion that malaria is a disease caused by mosquito bites. Female health workers perceived a child to have malaria when the body temperature was very high and the child developed fever. There were many signs as perceived by the local people. For example, the child becomes restless and the temperature keeps rising to 40°C and above. Some participants reported that when a child starts convulsing, they think of malaria. When convulsions start, malaria and witchcraft are taken to be synonymous, and they perceive the signs and symptoms of malaria to mean witchcraft. In this situation, they think that witches have attacked the child. Some also mistake malaria to mean infection of the spleen. The following comment was expressed by nine (45%) of the in-depth interview participants. "Fever is when temperature is very high. When you touch the child, you feel heat. The child may start to develop contractions, becomes restless and the eyes turn. When this happens, you know that it is malaria."
Most focus group discussion participants had incorrect views of malaria, as indicated in the following comment:
"When the child's body temperature is very high and he/she convulses, people know that this is malaria. It is also thought to be due to witchcraft. The mother would say that the child is a victim of witchcraft and has developed high body temperature or convulsion. To remedy this situation, the child is taken to the native doctor."
Female caregivers and community health workers mentioned common signs, like headache, joint pains, change of eye color, crying, and even convulsions. Mothers stated that fatigue, inactivity, inability to eat and drink, and shivering were signs of malaria. Men were also unanimous about paleness as a prominent sign of malaria. Older mothers insisted on cracked lips, running nose (catarrh), and red eyes as signs that the child has malaria. Community guides also mentioned all the other signs, and added swollen eyes and hallucination as indications of malaria in children. A summary of the findings on the perception of malaria by various categories of participants is shown in Table 2. Few differences were observed according to age group and gender.

Actions taken at home by mothers/ caregivers of children with malaria

Shopkeepers and younger and older mothers reported that mothers and caregivers first either wet the child with a towel or simply bath the child with cool water in an attempt to lower the temperature, followed by giving drugs such as paracetamol and quinine or nivaquine before thinking of the hospital. In the absence of drugs at home, some of them administer traditional concoctions, which they perceived to be useful and harmless, to calm the fever. "She is forced to wet a towel and put it on the child to lower the body temperature and avoid convulsion. When the body temperature rises to a certain level, the child convulses.
After wetting with the towel, there are other means to keep temperature low. Suppositories are inserted into the anus. Amodiaquine syrup is also given since it is currently found in the market. When the situation does not improve, the child is taken to a health facility where examinations are conducted."
"Mothers generally wet the towel and put on babies.
When there are no drugs at home, certain herbs are harvested and given to the child. The child is bathed with the herbs since these are not expensive. Some herbs are used to purge the child and malaria subsides later."
According to community drug distributors, alternative forms of malaria treatment consisted of rubbing the baby's body with castor oil (commonly known as "menyanga") before administering drugs after some hours of rubbing the child with a concoction of honey and menthol. These are strategies used to lower the child's body temperature. Contrary to what the other participants described as first-line home treatment, female health workers strongly disapproved of what mothers/caregivers do at home when children develop a high temperature. According to them, inappropriate treatment regimes are administered when children present signs and symptoms of malaria. Drugs like metronidazole, cotrimoxazole, and mebendazole were perceived to be effective malaria drugs by caregivers. Apart from the mere administration of inappropriate drugs, some mothers also proceed to purge children who present with signs and symptoms of malaria. "You will be surprised to hear that a child who is having high temperature is being given flagyl or bactrim or efferalgan. For those who know, they can give efferalgan, but it is surprising that a child with high temperature, the mother is giving bactrim, or vermox to treat malaria. Since chloroquine is no more in the market, some of them buy it from hawkers." Health managers, shopkeepers, and private clinic operators were of the opinion that whenever children have malaria, mothers and caregivers go straight to shops, markets, and private drug vendors for first-line drugs. Most of the time they use drugs which have been banned, like chloroquine. Some also use inappropriate drugs like cotrimoxazole. They only think of the hospital when the situation is almost out of hand, ie, when the child has already developed signs of severe malaria. They stated that what mothers and caregivers do at home for the treatment of malaria is inappropriate.
"Their first action is to go to the road side drug hawkers where the quality of drugs is doubtful. This is because hawkers are found all over the quarter. Their action is to see whether high temperature can be lowered. This is the first action because she is the person who is most of the time at home. It is only when it is beyond their capacity that they go to the hospital when the child has developed signs of severe malaria."

Difficulties faced by mothers in HMM for children

Participants enumerated several difficulties faced by mothers treating children suffering from malaria. Drug sellers cited the frequent change of malaria drugs by the Ministry of Public Health, which creates confusion in the minds of caregivers. Other health care providers complained that mothers and caregivers do not know the dosages of some of the drugs administered to children, coupled with an inability to read the child's temperature. Mothers did not understand what malaria is because of ignorance. Some were ignorant to the point that they did not understand the dangers associated with the disease. Other major difficulties faced by mothers according to all the participants, and especially health care providers, were financial constraints and lack of appropriate drugs in the home. Some children developed severe malaria at home, not because their mothers or caregivers do not take them to hospital, but because they are unable to afford treatment. Poverty rendered some of them unable to afford 200 FCFA (about 2 USD) for treatment.
"When children develop signs of malaria, the mother first wets a towel and wraps the child with in an attempt to lower the temperature. There is a need to have a thermometer at home. It is our wish that this should be available at home so that the management of simple malaria can be possible.
Mothers should also keep some drugs at home, such as antipyretics. They should be trained to give these drugs."
What mothers should do when children have a high temperature Drug sellers were of the opinion that mothers should protect their children by using mosquito nets. Female health care submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress providers and private clinic operators insisted that mothers should do everything possible to start appropriate HMM before bringing babies to the nearest health facility, rather than taking inappropriate actions, such as putting the child's head into the toilet. Clinic operators and nurses indicated that mothers and caregivers should have thermometers at home, to take the baby's temperature and ascertain the severity of illness, and keep basic drugs such as paracetamol, amodiaquine syrup, or ACT at home in case the child develops a high temperature.

Role played by fathers and male relatives when child has malaria

The role of fathers and male relatives in this community was perceived by female caregivers to involve maintaining hygiene in the physical environment, draining away stagnant water, clearing dirt away from the residential area, and purchasing insecticide-treated nets for the family. All informants were unanimous about fathers and male relatives' responsibility for provision of financial assistance to the family when children suffer from malaria. They perceived fathers and male relatives as breadwinners for the family. They cited the absence of fathers and male relatives from home most of the time. Some female participants indicated that the provision of money is not as burdensome as taking care of a sick child at home and, worst of all, in hospital. However, the majority were of the opinion that financial provision is the most important aspect of the responsibilities of fathers and male relatives. Young female mothers were of the opinion that fathers and male relatives do not really care about the health of their children.
"It is true that the majority of young mothers have children whose fathers are very far away. When these children are sick, grandparents do not directly react. They tend to ask the whereabouts of their real fathers. Within this time lapse, young mothers go to roadside drug vendors. These drugs are popularly referred to as cassava powder."
Other female participants stated that fathers and male relatives do assist them with household chores like cooking, washing dishes, and taking care of children when they are sick. Some fathers and male relatives also accompany their children to health units and hospitals. Finally, fathers and male relatives play a supervisory role in confirming when they come back from work that the child's treatment was properly administered. Some fathers and male relatives examine children's treatment booklets or cards. They also advise mothers and caregivers to take children to health facilities when they are sick.

Where mothers seek therapy for children with malaria

There were many therapeutic options for HMM in our study area, including roadside drug vendors, drugs from drug stores (not operated by trained pharmacists), pharmacies, health centers, clinics, hospital-based treatment, and traditional or alternative treatment. Community drug vendors, community guides, and nurses stated that when children suffer from malaria, mothers come to them first and are offered all kinds of malaria drugs. It is only when the illness persists that children are taken to the nearest health facility. Health personnel and private clinic operators ventured some reasons why mothers prefer roadside drug vendors to health centers and hospitals.
"The roadside drug vendors do not charge consultation and laboratory fees; they do not demand a treatment card as a prerequisite for treatment."
When caregivers must seek hospital services, they often go to the CEBEC Protestant Hospital, which is located within the health district. This hospital is well attended because it provides drugs according to the severity of the disease and age group, and only gives the exact doses that are required to cure the disease. By so doing, mothers are faced with less financial expenditure. This is in contrast with government health facilities, where whole packets of drugs are prescribed even when only a few will be used. Most of the health personnel were of the opinion that mothers take their babies to the nearest health centers or clinics because of lack of finance to cover the cost of transportation. They also prefer health centers because they receive the services of trained nurses. Shopkeepers and managers of health-related nongovernmental organizations were of the opinion that most mothers prefer private to public facilities. They are motivated by the presence of a relative or submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress friend in the private health facility who would offer certain considerations regarding the means of payment and the possibility to receive treatment on credit and pay later on. However, some mothers and parents preferred the services of public hospitals because they have qualified personnel and a range of specialists. Health personnel, as well as older and younger mothers, mentioned that some mothers, before taking their children to a health facility, would first seek the services of soothsayers ("ngambe" men) and traditional healers. The reasoning behind this is they believe that there are some underlying causes of diseases that are not microbial. It is only after checking for an underlying or hidden cause of the illness and performing certain rituals that they go to the hospital for treatment.
"The majority of people prefer to go to roadside drug hawkers while some go to soothsayers. When children develop convulsion, they believe that they have extraordinary eyes.
They will tell you that since your child is convulsing without high body temperature, you have to take him/her to the soothsayer. If not, witches will kill him/her. Most of them come back to the hospital when the cases are serious."

Appropriate source of treatment sought by caregivers of children with malaria

Opinions were divided regarding the most appropriate source of treatment for malaria in the Bonassama health district. The Bonassama District Hospital and the CEBEC Confessional Hospital were the most appropriate sources of treatment. Nurses, caregivers, health managers, and mothers were of the opinion that the Bonassama District Hospital is the most appropriate source of treatment for childhood malaria because of the presence of specialists, well trained nurses, very cheap drugs, and better laboratory facilities. Drug sellers, shopkeepers, and some mothers preferred the private and confessional hospitals for a range of reasons. The first reason was that the reception in this hospital is cordial. Secondly, they retail drugs, and parents only need to buy what is necessary for a specific bout of illness. Many poor parents are therefore attracted to this hospital. Thirdly, many people go to confessional hospitals for religious reasons.

Perception of prepackaged ACT

All participants were of the opinion that mothers appreciate prepackaged ACT for HMM because most are illiterate and usually find it difficult to manipulate drugs before administering them to their children. With prepackaged ACT, the doses are clear and easy to administer. Nothing is required except for education and awareness on the part of mothers regarding the importance of this new treatment strategy. "Mothers will find this marvelous because they will master even the administration of the dosage. Even those who did not go to school will equally master it. The illustrations on the package will direct them. When the drugs are not prepackaged, they can easily misunderstand its usage."
Health managers and nurses were of the opinion that mothers would welcome the new approach because they do not always have access to drugs in the community. There is usually a barrier between the health system and the community. Bringing treatment into the home in the form of prepackaged drugs would solve most of the difficulties faced by mothers when their children suffer from malaria. Private clinic operators and shopkeepers also said that mothers would appreciate the strategy. Their worry was the drug formulation. Pre-packaged ACT is in tablet form for administration to children under 5 years of age. They wondered why the treatment was not in syrup form to facilitate administration. However, they concluded that mothers would grind the tablets before administering them to children. "We are talking of prepackaged drugs for the treatment of children below 5 years. I would have preferred syrups.
Maybe mothers can grind the tablets into powder before giving to the children."
Opinion leaders had a very favorable view of prepackaged ACT. If parents can have people around them who can come to their assistance with prepackaged drugs when children suffer from malaria, it is a laudable initiative. The only impediment, according to most of the participants, might be the price at which these prepackaged drugs are offered at the community level.

Potential community distributors of ACT

Community members were unanimous about the preferred distribution channels. They agreed that community health workers involved in routine vaccination campaigns should distribute the prepackaged drugs. They did not want nurses to be involved in the distribution because they felt that nurses have a tendency to sell drugs at their own prices. In communities where there are no community health workers, more need to be selected and trained. The main selection criterion should be their availability for work, because the drugs are supposed to be distributed throughout the day. Regarding the appropriate place in which to keep prepackaged ACT, submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress some were of the opinion that it should be the quarter head's residence. Although local politics at the community level may often impact negatively on distribution, the quarter head's residence was still the preferred distribution venue and the preferred distributors were vaccinators who are well trained.
On the other hand, the majority of community members considered health centers or health posts to be the appropriate place for storage of drugs, the reason being that it would not be easy to access the quarter head's residence at any time of day. Secondly, health centers or health posts are found in all quarters and function all day round. Apart from this, small units could be created at the community level and managed by community health workers trained for this purpose. Thirdly, the quarter head's residence might not fulfill the requirements for storage of drugs. Trained community health workers who are vaccinators should be encouraged to go to health facilities and obtain the drugs for distribution.

Willingness to pay for prepackaged ACT

All participants were unanimous about the idea that mothers would pay for prepackaged drugs. What was needed was assurance that the medication is effective. If the medication is effective for malaria treatment, mothers will pay for it. Therefore, there is a need for effective communication within the community. Mothers could be educated and made aware of the importance of the drug. Health managers and nurses were of the opinion that price does not matter and that health has no price. According to them, mothers will pay even if the drug is expensive. "People will be willing to comply under the difficult poverty conditions in Cameroon; but health has no price. If the ACT is effective like plasmotrim (12 tablets) which costs 3800 FCFA, people will pay to cure their children of malaria.
Price cannot be a problem because, sometimes when we take children to the hospital, the child can receive 4 and 5 drips which are very expensive." However, caregivers and mothers were of the opinion that price could be a major determinant of acceptability and adherence. If the drug is very expensive, it will kill any enthusiasm for the treatment. On the other hand, if it is cheap, most people will be willing to pay.

Cost of ACT as perceived by community members

Community members were of the opinion that the drugs should not be distributed free of charge but the amount should not be too high, taking into consideration the difficult economic situation in the country. When the price is too low, people might misjudge the value of the drug, and if it is too high, this might deter many people from using it. All participants agreed unanimously that there should be a price for rapid diagnostic testing and ACT. Several prices were given for the prepackaged drugs, including 100, 150, 200, 250, 300, 500, 600, 1000, and 1200 FCFA. Most community members were of the opinion that the price should not be more than 1200 FCFA, but the majority cited 500 FCFA for prepackaged drugs.
Willingness of mothers to accept rapid diagnostic testing for their children All the participants stated that mothers would welcome the rapid diagnostic test. It was observed that, most often, it is mothers who request a blood test when they visit health facilities. The advantage of rapid diagnostic testing for mothers is that it saves time because results are immediately available. The strategy also saves money spent on transport to and from the laboratory. These advantages were particularly perceived by caregivers, all mothers, and drug sellers. Most mothers expressed a willingness to allow their children to be tested by finger-pricking. They cited many therapeutic practices for malaria within the community, which they perceived to be negative compared with ACT and the rapid diagnostic test. One of them reported burning the child's body or exposing the child to extreme heat in an attempt to cure malaria, which she mistakenly perceived to be failure of the spleen. "We have to sensitize the people, when the people know that it is for their own good, they will do everything possible for their children to be tested and treated. It comes to mind that there is a very painful and primitive way of curing malaria or something they call 'spleen failure'. They burn the stomach of the child. You see that fire has been used on the child. If mothers can stand to see their child being burnt because they want them to be well, then what is the matter of just taking a pin, eh, prick the child's finger, get some blood, diagnose and treat the child. I think parents will accept that." Opinion leaders and pharmacists were of the opinion that mothers would be in need of intensive education and sensitization on the importance of the procedure before they embrace it. Health care providers and community health workers insisted on involving community health dialog members in the sensitization of mothers and caregivers about the importance of the rapid diagnostic test. submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com

Dovepress


Dovepress

Appropriate personnel to undertake rapid diagnostic testing There were divergent views on the right persons to carry out rapid diagnostic testing on children in the community. The choices were nurses, community health workers, and laboratory technicians. Community drug sellers, nurses, other health care providers, and younger and older mothers were of the opinion that the test should be conducted by nurses. However, they said that if it is going to be done in the community, the people responsible should have a certain level of education. The General Ordinary Level Certificate was the minimum level of education considered necessary for anybody conducting the test on children. Community guides and community health workers, young mothers, and some female health care providers were of the opinion that the test should be conducted by people involved in community health issues, such as vaccination. They argued that mothers and caregivers already have confidence in community health workers and community vaccinators, and that these people have good knowledge of how society functions. The conclusion was that whoever is selected to conduct the rapid diagnostic test within the community should be given adequate education. They emphasized the issues at stake, such as human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome, insisting that mishandling of blood under such circumstances would be catastrophic.

Cost of rapid diagnostic testing

None of our key informants were of the opinion that the test should be carried out free of charge. Participants suggested several prices, ranging from 100 to 2000 FCFA (100, 150, 200, 250, 300, 500, 800, 1000, 1500, and 2000 FCFA). More than half of the informants cited 200 FCFA as the most appropriate price for the rapid diagnostic test. "There should not be a cost of prepackaged ACT separate from the cost of RDT." It would be reasonable to charge 500 FCFA for the cost of treatment, knowing that the cost of prepackaged drugs is 300 FCFA and the cost of the rapid diagnostic test is 200 FCFA.

Obstacles likely to be encountered with HMM in children under 5 years

Most health personnel, drug sellers, community guides, and men were of the opinion that there would be no difficulties in carrying out the rapid diagnostic test in children under 5 years. Just the simple fact that the results are given immediately renders the strategy plausible. They likened its rapidity to that of the pregnancy test. However, an obstacle could be the educational level and training of those who are to be involved in the execution of the test at the community level. If they are not well trained, they might misuse their tools, which would end up being discarded by the community. They should be trained, for example, on the importance of the use of one disposable needle per child.
"The problems that we may face is when the RDT is con- Mothers and caregivers stated that because Douala is made up of people of diverse origins and backgrounds, the problem of tribalism is likely going to surface. In a Bamileke-dominated or Bassa-dominated quarter, people might not be ready to welcome a community health worker who comes from a different ethnic background and vice versa.
"Since I am not Bassa, working in a predominantly Bamileke quarter may cause problems of tribalism."
Mothers also cited religious beliefs as one of the obstacles which might affect HMM, especially concerning fingerpricking of babies. Many religious denominations do not allow children to be vaccinated or treated by manipulating blood, and believe that they can only be saved by God.
"I think there are some religions that don't want children to be vaccinated because they think that their religion would save them. Some religions would not allow any treatment.
When one goes to them for any intervention, they would drive you away."
Opinion leaders and nongovernmental organization managers mentioned the logistics problems concerning the rapid diagnostic test, ie, it needs several associated materials, which might easily run out. Such materials submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress include disposable lancets, cotton wool, alcohol, and plasters.

Suggestions for improving HMM

Community drug sellers and shopkeepers suggested the wearing of identification badges, bags, and caps with HMM messages to facilitate acceptability. People responsible for rapid diagnostic testing should be given gloves to protect themselves during finger-pricking. Drug sellers and clinic managers insisted that nothing is done for nothing nowadays, because volunteerism in the real sense does not exist, hence community drug distributors should be given some incentives. They raised the idea of combining the cost of ACT and rapid diagnostic testing. Given that they will not be distributed free of charge, a small percentage should be added for the distribution agents. If there are separate prices for prepackaged ACT and the rapid diagnostic test, confusion may arise and HMM could collapse.

Preferred communication channels for social mobilization of HMM

Participants cited several sources of information in the community, but thought there was some divergence of views, although some common ground was found. The sources where there were divergence of opinion concerned radio, television, and newspapers. The main sources of information on which nearly everybody agreed were community vaccinators, health dialog structure members, community chiefs, meeting houses ("njangis"), churches, and hospitals. Male and female community drug sellers, shopkeepers, young mothers, and pharmacy operators cited television and radio. They said that health radio and television spots are communicated most of the time in the French and English languages. Information through these sources could talk of the devastating effects of malaria on life and on the economy. According to them, this information comes most of the time from private rather than public media sources. Caregivers, health care providers, and opinion leaders cited community vaccinators, health dialog structure members, community chiefs, and churches as the main sources of information within the community. Information from the health district is sent to health centers via health dialog structure members who pass it down to the chiefs. The chiefs use the quarter heads who communicate directly with the rest of the population. In communities, vaccinators are used to going from door-to-door. Churches and meetings are also used as communication channels because there is always time reserved in meetings and churches for announcements. This is when health information is communicated to people who attend church services and meetings, who go home with the information, which is further circulated within the community.

Preferred channel for communication of HMM strategy

Many channels were discussed, but those who cited radio and television preferred private radio and television channels. They cited some local private media houses such as Radio Equinox, Sweet FM, and Canal 2. They were of the opinion that public media houses are more concerned with politics than with health. The church was identified as one of the more preferred communication channels. The argument was that because the majority of people go to worship houses, this will be the surest means, given that radios and televisions are not affordable to all, and many people might miss out on important information. Some were of the opinion that preachers should communicate health information in churches, because when information is communicated by pastors, people will take it seriously. Schools were also singled out as an important communication channel for passing on health information because children then pass on the information to their parents. Opinion leaders and nongovernmental organization managers preferred health information via flyers, posters, and banners. When flyers are distributed in meetings or churches, people take them back to their households. Because African households contain so many people, they could pass on the information to the rest of the community.

Most effective communication channels for HMM social mobilization

Although radio and television were cited among the most appropriate communication channels within the community, community health dialog structures emerged as an outstanding channel for communication. These are community health decision-makers and already live within the population. A community with an active community health dialog president has the chance to benefit in terms of communication. Alternative appropriate channels for communication within the community were churches and schools. Teachers and preachers are effective communicators in the community. Participants suggested that in addition to using community health dialog structures, these personnel should be approached for communication. Radio and television are good, but do not reach all the population strata. There are many houses without radios and television sets. Even when these are available, only a cross-section of the population watches and listens to them. Young people within the household might listen, but parents might not. submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com

Dovepress


Dovepress


Additional information on improving HMM

Participants were mostly concerned about the side effects of ACT and the price at which it was going to be offered at the community level. Mothers should be sensitized on possible side effects of ACT. Participants also sought clear information on the dosage so that mothers or caregivers could administer ACT safely and effectively. Community health care workers were eager to understand the signs and symptoms of malaria to differentiate the disease from other diseases in the community. There was still confusion between malaria and spleen enlargement. It would also be necessary to explain the philosophy behind the rapid diagnostic test to the population, and especially to mothers, telling them that it is necessary to conduct the test to diagnose malaria because there are several other diseases which might also lead to a high temperature, as well as telling them of the difficulties we might run into if ACT is given without the test and the problem of malaria drug resistance. Most mothers, both younger and older, were eager to understand the facts behind convulsions. This phenomenon is what frightens parents most. Often they perceived this to be attributable to witchcraft.
"If a drug is added to the treatment package to take care of convulsion, this will greatly help mothers; because very often we panic when a child convulses." Understanding convulsions will help reduce tension in mothers. This will lead to rational decision-making about the treatment of malaria. Young mothers were eager to understand why the distribution of mosquito nets to pregnant mothers and households with children under 5 years is not effective. Many were also concerned about why all age groups were not offered the mosquito nets.

Perceived role of participants in supporting HMM

The participants perceived diverse roles which they could play in the provision of HMM at the community level. Community drug sellers stated that if they were given the opportunity to distribute prepackaged ACT, they would do everything possible to convince mothers and caregivers to give nothing but the drug. They were aware that most drugs they sell have been banned by the Ministry of Public Health. Female caregivers perceived their role in HMM to be limited to sensitization of mothers regarding taking children to the hospital and maintaining general hygiene and cleanliness. They could sensitize mothers to clear dirt from their environment and drain standing water to avoid breeding of mosquitoes.
Nurses and other health care providers thought that they would have a paramount role in educating and sensitizing the population, and especially mothers, on malaria and its devastating effects. They would ensure that mothers understand the risk of malaria infection and educate mothers and caregivers to understand what to do when children have malaria. They also thought that the prevention of malaria is more important than trying to cure it, hence the need to sensitize on the use of bed nets.
Health managers perceived their role as lying in the provision of HMM in the domains of community training, sensitization, and mobilization. Because health managers are the focal persons in the health district, they have the responsibility to train community members who are involved in health care delivery. Once community drug distributors are selected, they are the people to train them on effective communication techniques. They were also ready to train community drug distributors on monitoring and evaluation techniques. All mothers perceived their role to be limited in recognizing malaria at home and treating it following the new strategy. They knew that they were the first persons to deal with malaria at its onset. Meanwhile, pharmacists perceived their role as handling complicated cases of malaria.

Main challenges of HMM at the urban community level

The greatest challenge perceived by the participants was the efficacy of prepackaged ACT. Most participants stated that if ACT reduces fever among children within the first 3 days, many caregivers will adhere to it. Winning adherence in the community was one of the major challenges. Another challenge was overcoming reticence among religious groups, preaching by which sometimes prevents people from receiving effective treatment. Shopkeepers perceived reduction of drug cost as being problematic. They complained of the high cost of living and an increase in poverty. If it were possible for the treatment to be given at an affordable price, malaria among children would be effectively tackled.

Solutions to challenges of urban HMM at the community level

Community adherence should be won systematically as a gradual process because consent of the population is necessary. We have to enable them to understand from the outset that HMM is theirs, so that there will be no difficulties submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress at the acquisition level. To overcome the problem of effective coverage in the community, many distributors have to be selected from all quarters so that people can have access to treatment at any time of the day and ensure that there are adequate stocks. We have to undertake effective education, sensitization, and mobilization of the community regarding the importance of HMM, and sensitize people to avoid an information void, which usually becomes filled by rumor. Training of those who are going to be directly involved in treatment is of the utmost importance, and includes training on how to handle the prepackaged drugs and on rapid diagnostic testing. Health managers also insisted on training community drug distributors about monitoring and evaluation of their own activities to avoid the errors that have arisen in other projects, like the distribution of insecticide-treated nets, which was welcomed by the community but was ultimately unsuccessful.

Current motivational practices for community health workers

Participants expressed diverse views about current practices for motivation of community health workers. Community drug sellers, shopkeepers, pharmacy operators, and mothers in all categories did not know about current practices of motivation for community health workers. All health personnel agreed that they used to give community vaccinators 1500 or 2000 FCFA per day for their involvement in the vaccination campaign. Those who were usually involved in sensitization were given 5000 FCFA a day for lunch, water, and taxi fares. This was not perceived as payment per se. Apart from the cash incentive, they were usually given a uniform (caps, apron, and badges) for identification purposes. This also helped to boost their standing in the community.
Health personnel felt that there were no problems with current motivational practices among community health workers. They estimated their work to be equal to the motivation given, because the work did not require a lot of talking. A simple whistle in the community during vaccination was more than enough signal for their work to start. Again, because vaccination is not an ongoing process, community health workers were not occupied all the time.
Community drug sellers and pharmacy operators were of the opinion that although they did not know what was being given to community drug distributors for their involvement in health programs in the community, they nevertheless knew that they were given something. "Nobody can work in Douala for a whole day for free," they said. They also expressed the view that for somebody to be happy, he or she should be paid a reasonable sum of money per day.
The district health manager was of the opinion that current motivational practices were enough to encourage those who take part in health activities in the community. Mothers thought that although they did not know what was being given to vaccinators, they believed motivating them was a good idea. They argued that these people need clothing, food, drinks, and other necessities of life. Therefore, they should be paid to compensate for their time and energy.

Nature of preferred incentives for community drug distributors

All participants agreed that incentives for community drug distributors should be monetary. They agreed that a cash payment was the best form of incentive. Two alternatives surfaced, ie, a daily incentive, which is a fixed sum of money paid to people who perform sporadic duties, and a percentage payment to those who perform ongoing duties. Community members who are co-opted to perform certain tasks for specific periods of time could be paid what was usually given to vaccinators, ie, 2000 FCFA per day. Those who were involved in ongoing activities, like the distribution of prepackaged drugs and rapid diagnostic testing, should be given a percentage of what they provide as the treatment package for malaria in the community. Drug sellers and shopkeepers recommended a purely market strategy for incentivizing community drug distributors. They stated that the project should add a tiny fraction to the cost price of the treatment of what they think could assist community drug distributors. At the end of each month, this fraction should then be calculated and given to each community drug distributor according to the quantity of ACT distributed.
"If the drug costs 300 FCFA, we can add 50 FCFA as gratification for the distributors; this puts ACT at 350 FCFA."

Community contribution towards motivation of drug distributors

Participants stated that community contribution could take several forms, moral, financial, and material. Mothers, shopkeepers, private clinic operators, and community drug sellers proposed that community members contributed directly to supporting HMM by buying the prepackaged drugs. If ACT is effective, many people will demand it, and those who are involved in its distribution will be paid by what the community offers as gratification for the purchase price of the drug. submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com

Dovepress


Dovepress

"If the ACTs are sold at a low price, and gratification is given to distributors, everybody will comply with the strategy. If the prepackaged drug costs 300 FCFA and the test costs 100 FCFA, we can add 50 FCFA as transport for the distributor and 50 FCFA as incentives. This puts the treatment package at 500 FCFA which according to me is not a problem for most families to afford".
Mothers also thought that community members could contribute by being friendly to those who distribute the drugs. According to them, once community drug distributors are supported morally, they will be very happy to execute their activities. Community members should not insult them. Nongovernmental organization managers thought that community contribution could take other forms, which are not easily perceived. Offering storage facilities and security for the rapid diagnostic test and prepackaged ACT and related materials was considered to be more than enough contribution. These are services which we should not expect the government to provide. Even the selection of community drug distributors is part of their contribution.

Acceptable incentive for community drug distributors

There was no consensus on an acceptable incentive for community drug distributors as per category of informants. Even within the same category, the suggested payments varied greatly. Those who understood the type of activities which community drug distributors were likely to perform proposed an additional 50 FCFA per dosage to the cost of treatment. Community drug sellers, shopkeepers, and nongovernmental organization managers proposed that an additional 50 FCFA should go to the community drug distributors for other community expenditures incurred in the provision of HMM. The incentive given to each community drug distributor should vary according to the quantity of ACT distributed.

Potential challenges to motivation of drug distributors

There were many challenges identified as facing the motivation of community drug distributors. One of these was how to make community drug distributors happy with what they receive as motivation. Another potential challenge was sensitization of the population. Once the population is effectively educated and sensitized about the importance of the new malaria treatment strategy, the project would move forward well. Initially there would not be any mass movement of the drug. Shopkeepers and drug sellers were of the opinion that a small proportion of the population has to start using the treatment and the rest will follow. The greatest challenge according to health managers was autofinancing of rapid diagnostic testing and ACT by the community. They were worried about community appropriation and sustainability. Apart from the motivation of community drug distributors, there was a need for the community to be able to replenish the rapid diagnostic test and prepackaged ACT in an ongoing way. How to revolve the autofinancing fund was a big challenge. Another potential problem was getting honest people at the community level to handle HMM, because the strategy entails handling money and materials.
"Those who were supposed to distribute ACT and rapid diagnostic test will handle money from their sales."
Another potential challenge was overcoming religious obstacles. There are many religious groups, the ideologies and preaching of which do not allow children to be taken to hospitals or do not permit the manipulation of human blood, such as the Jehovah's Witnesses and Pentecostal churches. Participants emphasized the need to overcome these barriers in society, taking into consideration the fact that adherence is a major determinant of feasibility.

Discussion

This study was carried out to determine the community perception and treatment response to childhood malaria episodes in an urban setting prior to the implementation of the home management strategy. These findings are helping in the implementation of HMM of malaria in Cameroon. Importantly, our study has shed light on the feasibility of HMM in an urban setting. We identified and analyzed the following feasibility determinants of HMM in urban settings: beliefs and practices regarding health-seeking behavior and drug use in the community; the most suitable distribution channels for ACT; acceptability of rapid diagnostic testing to confirm malaria in children under 5 years before administering ACT; a nominal cost for a rapid diagnostic test; and an acceptable incentive for community drug distributors to perform their work well. These factors have been confirmed by other studies as being important in the implementation of HMM. 25 Convulsions, which are a prominent feature of severe malaria, were perceived as a separate disease associated with evil spirits and witchcraft, a perception noted in other parts of Africa. [15][16][17][18][29][30][31][32] Traditional healing was customary, and submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com the first option for management of convulsions, even if this was likely to be followed by a hospital consultation. Such a practice might cause delays to appropriate and effective treatment. The perception that an injection would be fatal for convulsing children has been reported earlier, 29 and might reinforce the use of traditional remedies. 18 In this study, vomiting and failure to eat, suck, and/or drink, which are symptoms of severe malaria, were identified as marking the development of malaria, which is in agreement with findings from a perception study in Tanzania. 18 The diverse perception of malaria within a given health district indicates how difficult the disease is to manage in an urban setting. People from different cultural backgrounds variously perceived the disease to originate from drinking dirty water, contaminated food items, or "the evil eye". These perceptions further compound the efforts being made to fight against the disease. Information, education, and communication for positive behavior change may become a very challenging issue for HMM in urban settings. This is consistent with what was found in two Ghanaian cities where malaria in the urban areas displayed a complexity that differs in many respects from the rural environment. 33 Others suggested that when children are not protected and eat dirty food and drink contaminated water, malaria is the outcome. 18 The different ways in which community members perceive malaria primarily reflects their view of the world.
Mothers and caregivers recognized malaria as a high temperature, and the first action taken was application of a wet towel or any wet material in an attempt to lower the temperature. This is a positive action which should be encouraged in the HMM strategy. Correct recognition of malaria at the community level by mothers and caregivers has been reported by Dunyo et al 34 and by the WHO. 35 Operational guidelines for HMM in Cameroon by the Ministry of Public Health in 2004 36 also acknowledged the fact that mothers diagnose malaria in their children and administer empirical treatment with drugs from diverse sources. Our findings reveal that some mothers first try drugs such as paracetamol, quinine, and nivaquine, although these have developed resistance, and others resort to alternative treatment regimes, such as enemas, inhalation from pit toilets, and administration of inappropriate drugs, such as metronidazole, cotrimoxazole, and mebendazole. The use of inappropriate antimalarial drugs and alternative treatments has been reported by the WHO. Many of the actions taken at home for the treatment of childhood malaria are inappropriate. This has been confirmed by other Cameroonian studies. 37 However, it is certain that mothers and caregivers always do something at home when children develop signs and symptoms of malaria.
Signs and symptoms of severe malaria were perceived to be related to different diseases. [15][16][17][18] Spleen problems, convulsions, and hallucinations (all symptoms of severe malaria) were perceived to be unrelated events, treatment for which could only be found outside the hospital milieu. This further indicates how narrowly malaria and its complications are perceived in this community. Therefore, one of the difficulties mothers and caregivers face in treating malaria among children in this urban milieu is ignorance. Other studies in Cameroon have confirmed this. 37,38 Inadequate knowledge of malaria treatment guidelines and irrational use of antimalarials has been reported in Cameroon. 39 Added to this, are the frequent changes in the drugs used to treat malaria by the Ministry of Public Health and financial problems.
Seeking of treatment for childhood malaria outside the home in this study area was influenced by the way the disease is perceived by mothers and caregivers and the community at large. 23 Those who understand the signs and symptoms of both simple and severe malaria go first to health centers and hospitals when treatment at home fails. Those who perceive signs and symptoms of simple and severe malaria to be different diseases go to soothsayers, traditional health practitioners, and spiritual healers, and only turn to health centers and hospitals as a last resort when complications set in. 37 Therefore, treatment of severe malaria in this health district does not often begin in health centers and hospitals.
Mothers perceived prepackaged ACT positively because they always provide treatment at home for their children. If treatment is effective and affordable, and if correct education and sensitization is carried out, full adherence would be assured. Their willingness to pay for prepackaged ACT was attenuated by the price offered and its effectiveness against malaria. However, the majority considered 500 FCFA to be the most affordable price for rapid diagnostic testing and prepackaged ACT.
Community health workers and community-based vaccinators were singled out as the potential distributors of ACT because they have been working in other health-related interventions, like administration of vitamin A, distribution of mectizan for onchocerciasis control, poliomyelitis vaccination, and sensitization on human immunodeficiency submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. The community has already won their confidence.
Participants were equally unanimous that mothers would readily appreciate and accept the rapid diagnostic test for their children. The argument was that mothers most often accept very strange and difficult treatment regimes for complicated malaria, some of which consist of blood-letting and the burning of children's body parts with severe heat in an attempt to treat malaria, what they termed "spleen failure". Therefore, the rapid diagnostic test will be appreciated as a simple treatment procedure, given that the goal of HMM is to bring treatment closer to the home. However, religious beliefs constitute a major obstacle to the rapid diagnostic test, given that some groups, such as Jehovah's Witnesses, forbid the manipulation of human blood.
Although participants acknowledged the presence of other mass media communication channels within the community, such as radio and television, they singled out social mobilization channels, such as groups and associations ("njangis", churches, and schools). As for sensitization, they preferred the door-to-door method for interpersonal communication. Posters and flyers were also suggested. This communication strategy has also been confirmed by HMM studies in Nigeria. 40 An incentive for community health workers to perform their duties effectively in the context of HMM was unanimously agreed upon by all participants as a determinant of control for this disease. This is important for the sustainability of HMM in both rural and urban settings. A high attrition rate among trained community drug distributors has been reported from a number of HMM studies in Africa. 25

Limitations

The major limitation of this study was rallying participants in an urban setting for focus group discussions and in-depth interviews, because most inhabitants of the region work long hours to pay for house rents and meet bills. This required a lot of persuasion to obtain participants, with a concomitant increase in the cost of the study. Also, some participants did not understand English or French, but this problem was solved by using Pidgin English, which is understood by most people in Cameroon. As noted elsewhere, 18 data collection relied heavily on informant reports of normative behavior in response to questions posed in a context far removed from the immediate stress and uncertainty of managing a child's actual illness, which could lead to overstating perceived norms, and underestimating or downplaying the extent to which people deviate from the norm. There is a likelihood that the researchers themselves were perceived as representing the health service and had vested interests in the Ministry of Public Health, which would tend to skew responses towards expression of greater acceptance of disease concepts and treatment practices. 18

Conclusion

Mothers in this study perceived malaria as an outcome of events other than mosquito bites. Home treatment of malaria is very common in the urban setting, and is guided by the way mothers perceive the signs and symptoms of the disease. The frequent changing of approved malaria drugs by the national health policy and financial difficulties were the main problems mothers faced in treating febrile children at home. Prepackaged ACT for simple malaria in children under 5 years of age and rapid diagnostic testing would be accepted if offered at an affordable price. Tribalism and religious beliefs might hinder the delivery of HMM. The availability of rapid diagnostic testing all year round is one of the challenges of HMM. Although radio and television figured among the current sources of information within the community, meetings, churches, schools and other public gatherings were considered to be the best venues for social mobilization, while community health workers and community leaders were considered to be the best sensitization agents for positive behavior change. Incentives for community drug distributors should be monetary, and could be deducted from the combined price of ACT and rapid diagnostic testing. For successful implementation of HMM, there should be proper education and social mobilization of the population. There should also be continuous monitoring and evaluation of community activities to ensure that there is ongoing availability of ACT and rapid diagnostic test stock within the framework of the intervention. More research is needed on HMM at the community level to improve identification, treatment, and referral of children with severe malaria, indicated by convulsions and inactivity, in order to improve child survival.
typing of the results. We are grateful to the Ministry of Public Health of Cameroon, all nongovernmental organizations, and field assistants working in Bonassama who collaborated in the data collection. This work received financial support from the United Nations Children's Fund/United Nations Development Programme/World Bank/WHO Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases, Geneva, Switzerland.

Drug, Healthcare and Patient Safety


Publish your work in this journal

Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/drug-healthcare-and-patient-safety-journal Drug, Healthcare and Patient Safety is an international, peer-reviewed open-access journal exploring patient safety issues in the healthcare continuum from diagnostic and screening interventions through to treatment, drug therapy and surgery. The journal is characterized by the rapid reporting of reviews, original research, clinical, epidemiological and post-marketing surveillance studies, risk management, health literacy and educational programs across all areas of healthcare delivery. The manuscript management system is completely online and includes a very quick and fair peer-review system. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/ testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors.

"

When my child has developed high body temperature, I rub a bit of castor oil all over his heads, legs and feet. After some hours, I give quinine to lower the temperature."

"

I have stayed in this quarter for long, when a child has fever, people rush to me. When I give treatment and the condition does not improve, I advise them to go to the protestant hospital where nurses handle malaria cases. Medical examinations are conducted and their drugs are relatively cheap. They also have very good pediatricians. They equally retail drugs. When you go there with 1000 francs, they will give you drugs worth 1000 FCFA. If you have 2000 FCFA, you will be given drugs worth this amount. Due to economic hardship, people prefer to go there for treatment."

"

Vaccinators already know the importance of good health; they know the dose of drugs; they can teach their neighbors many things like going for the vaccination of their children. These vaccinators are community people because they collaborate well with everybody in the quarters. Since they are from my quarter, I cannot close my door to them when they are working or sensitizing the community."
ducted by someone who does not have the health knowledge; they could end up infecting the children. They might use one lancet on two or three children without sterilizing, or without discarding. If they don't have the basic knowledge on finger pricking technique, they might contaminate many children and the mothers might feel reluctant to bring their children for treatment."
malaria from monotherapy to artemisinin-based combination therapy by health professionals in rural health facilities in southern Cameroon. Malar J. in the context of home management of malaria in south-west Nigeria. BMC Health Serv Res. 2008;8:119. submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress Dovepress

Table 1

1Sample of the participants who took part in focus group discussions and in-depth interviews in the Bonassama health district Abbreviations: FGD, focus group discussion; IDI, in-depth interviews.Data collection methods 
Sources of data 
Area 1 
Area 2 
Total
Number of FGD
FGD 
Mothers ,24 years 
1 
1 
2
Mothers .24 years 
1 
1 
2 
Old women 
1 
1 
2 
Men 
1 
1 
2 
Community health workers 
1 
1 
2 
Community drug distributors 
1 
1 
2 
Community guides 
1 
1 
2 
Technical advisers to community 
health workers (area 1 + area 2)
1 
1
Total FGD 
7 + 7 + 1 
15
IDI 
Number of IDI 
Caregivers 
1 
1 
2 
Opinion leaders 
1 
1 
2 
Pharmacists 
1 
1 
2 
Shopkeepers 
1 
1 
2 
Chemical sellers 
1 
1 
2 
Nongovernmental organizations 
1 
1 
2 
Private clinics/hospital operators 
1 
1 
2 
Community health workers 
1 
1 
2 
Health managers 
1 
1 
2 
Health care providers 
1 
1 
2 
Total IDI 
10 
10 
20

Table 2

2Perception of malaria by various categories of participants who took part in focus group discussions and in-depth interviewsPerception of malaria 
Categories of participant who expressed such views
Disease caused by mosquito bites 
Female caregivers, community guides, nurses 
High temperature and fever 
Female health workers, female caregivers, mothers 
Restlessness, eyes rolled, raised temperature 
Female care givers, mothers 
Convulsion 
Mothers, old women, female caregivers, community health workers 
Witchcraft 
Mothers, old women, men 
Spleen infection 
Mothers, female caregivers, old women, men 
Headache, joint pains 
Female caregivers, community health workers 
Crying, inability to eat/drink, shivering, fatigue, inactivity 
Mothers, female caregivers, community health workers 
Paleness 
Men 
Cracked lips, catarrh, red eyes 
Old mothers, female caregivers, community health workers 
Swollen eyes, hallucination 
Community guide
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Home management using ACT for childhood malaria Drug, Healthcare and Patient Safety 2012:4
Nsagha et al Drug, Healthcare and Patient Safety 2012:4
Home management using ACT for childhood malaria
AcknowledgmentsWe are grateful to the Provincial Delegate of Public Health in Littoral Province, Dr Sone and the District Medical Officer of the Bonassama Health District, Dr Simon Mbunya and his staff for their collaboration, and the local population involved in the data collection. We thank Mr James Achanyi Fontem of Cameroon Link for mobilizing the local population. Mr Nguedjio Christophe was excellent in his translation and submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress DovepressDisclosureThe authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.
Unit dose packaged drugs for treating malaria. L C Orton, G Barnish, Orton LC, Barnish G. Unit dose packaged drugs for treating malaria [review].
. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 24614Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;2:CD004614.
Malaria for the anaesthetist. S Espina-Bertoso, Anaesthesia. Available. Espina-Bertoso S. Malaria for the anaesthetist. Anaesthesia. Available from: http://update.anaesthesiologists.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/ Malaria-for-the-anaesthestist.pdf. Accessed August 15, 2011.
London: Reed Business Information Ltd. S Bhattacharyu, The deadly rise of urban malariaBhattacharyu S. The deadly rise of urban malaria. [webpage on the Inter- net]. London: Reed Business Information Ltd; Nov 30, 2004. Available from: http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn6740-the-deadly-rise-of- urban-malaria.html. Accessed Nov 2, 2011.
Urban malaria treatment behaviour in the context of low levels of malaria transmission in Lagos, Nigeria. W R Brieger, H R Sesay, H Adesina, Afr J Med Med Sci. 30SupplBrieger WR, Sesay HR, Adesina H, et al. Urban malaria treatment behaviour in the context of low levels of malaria transmission in Lagos, Nigeria. Afr J Med Med Sci. 2001;30 Suppl:7-15.
Urban malaria in Yaounde (Cameroon) in 2000. Entomological studies in the. H Nimpaye, Dakar" Central quarter. OCEA Bulletin. FrenchNimpaye H, et al. Urban malaria in Yaounde (Cameroon) in 2000. Entomological studies in the "Dakar" Central quarter. OCEA Bulletin. 2000. French.
Promoting pre-packaged drugs for prompt and appropriate treatment of febrile illnesses in rural Nigerian communities. W R Brieger, L Salako, R Umeh, P Agomo, B Afolabi, A Adeneye, Int Quart Com Health Edu. 211Brieger WR, Salako L, Umeh R, Agomo P, Afolabi B, Adeneye A. Promoting pre-packaged drugs for prompt and appropriate treatment of febrile illnesses in rural Nigerian communities. Int Quart Com Health Edu. 2002;21(1):19-40.
Compliance with correct doses of chloroquine in uncomplicated malaria correlates with improvement in the condition of rural Nigerian children. P O Okonkwo, C O Akpala, H U Okafor, A U Mbah, O Nwaiweu, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 953Okonkwo PO, Akpala CO, Okafor HU, Mbah AU, Nwaiweu O. Compliance with correct doses of chloroquine in uncomplicated malaria correlates with improvement in the condition of rural Nigerian children. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2001;95(3):320-324.
a survey of home treatment of children with fever, bednet use and attendance at antenatal clinics. M J Hamel, A Odhacha, J M Roberts, M S Deming, Malaria control in Bungoma District. 7911Bull World Health Organ.Hamel MJ, Odhacha A, Roberts JM, Deming MS. Malaria control in Bungoma District, Kenya: a survey of home treatment of children with fever, bednet use and attendance at antenatal clinics. Bull World Health Organ. 2001;79(11):1014-1023.
Changing home treatment of childhood fevers by training shopkeepers in rural Kenya. V M Marsh, W M Muteni, J Muturi, Trop Med Int Health. 45Marsh VM, Muteni WM, Muturi J, et al. Changing home treatment of childhood fevers by training shopkeepers in rural Kenya. Trop Med Int Health. 1999;4(5):383-389.
Early treatment of childhood fevers with pre-packaged anti-malarial drugs in the home reduces severe malaria morbidity in Burkina Faso. S B Sirima, A Konate, A B Tiono, N Convelbo, S Cousens, F Pagnoni, Trop Med Int Health. 82Sirima SB, Konate A, Tiono AB, Convelbo N, Cousens S, Pagnoni F. Early treatment of childhood fevers with pre-packaged anti-malarial drugs in the home reduces severe malaria morbidity in Burkina Faso. Trop Med Int Health. 2003;8(2):133-139.
A community-based programme to provide prompt and adequate treatment of presumptive malaria in children. F Pagnoni, N Convelbo, J Tiendrebeogo, S Consens, F Esposito, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 915Pagnoni F, Convelbo N, Tiendrebeogo J, Consens S, Esposito F. A community-based programme to provide prompt and adequate treat- ment of presumptive malaria in children. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1997;91(5):512-517.
Scaling up home-based management of malaria: from research to implementation. WHOWHO. Scaling up home-based management of malaria: from research to implementation. WHO. 2004:1-94.
Treatment seeking for malaria: a review of recent research. S C Mccombie, Soc Sci Med. 436McCombie SC. Treatment seeking for malaria: a review of recent research. Soc Sci Med. 1996;43(6):933-945.
Self-treatment for malaria: the evidence and methodological issues. S C Mccombie, Health Policy Plan. 174McCombie SC. Self-treatment for malaria: the evidence and method- ological issues. Health Policy Plan. 2002;17(4):333-344.
Local terminology for febrile illnesses in Bagamoyo District, Tanzania and its impact on the design of a community-based malaria control programme. P J Winch, A M Makemba, S R Kamazima, Soc Sci Med. 427Winch PJ, Makemba AM, Kamazima SR, et al. Local terminology for febrile illnesses in Bagamoyo District, Tanzania and its impact on the design of a community-based malaria control programme. Soc Sci Med. 1995;42(7):1057-1067.
Malariarelated beliefs and behaviour in southern Ghana. implication for treatment, prevention and control. C K Ahorlu, S K Dunyo, E A Afari, K A Koram, F K Nkrumah, Trop Med Int Health. 25Ahorlu CK, Dunyo SK, Afari EA, Koram KA, Nkrumah FK. Malaria- related beliefs and behaviour in southern Ghana. implication for treatment, prevention and control. Trop Med Int Health. 1997;2(5):488-499.
Care-seeking patterns for fatal malaria in Tanzania. D De Savigny, C Mayombana, E Mwageni, Malar J. 327de Savigny D, Mayombana C, Mwageni E, et al. Care-seeking patterns for fatal malaria in Tanzania. Malar J. 2004;3:27.
Recognition, perceptions and treatment practices for severe malaria in rural Tanzania: implications for accessing rectal artesunate as a pre-referral. M Warsame, O Kimbute, Z Machinda, PLoS One. 21149Warsame M, Kimbute O, Machinda Z, et al. Recognition, perceptions and treatment practices for severe malaria in rural Tanzania: implications for accessing rectal artesunate as a pre-referral. PLoS One. 2007; 2(1):e149.
Malaria and urbanization in Sub-Saharan Africa. M J Donnelly, P J Mccall, C Lengeler, Malar J. 4112Donnelly MJ, McCall PJ, Lengeler C, et al. Malaria and urbanization in Sub-Saharan Africa. Malar J. 2005;4(1):12.
Evaluation of the resistance of Plasmodium falciparium to chloroquine in Cameroon and alternative therapies. G Soula, M Ndounga, V Foumane, Bulletin of OCEA. 33FrenchSoula G, Ndounga M, Foumane V, et al. Evaluation of the resistance of Plasmodium falciparium to chloroquine in Cameroon and alternative therapies. Bulletin of OCEA. 2000;33:13-22. French.
Ministry of Public Health Cameroon. National strategic plan to fight against malaria. FrenchMinistry of Public Health Cameroon. National strategic plan to fight against malaria. 1-171. French.
Study on malaria morbidity in Emombo quarters, Yaounde. Medical Thesis. Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences. University of Yaounde I, Cameroo. J Djoufack, FrenchDjoufack J. Study on malaria morbidity in Emombo quarters, Yaounde. Medical Thesis. Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences. University of Yaounde I, Cameroo. 1996. French.
Knowledge and practices relating to malaria in a semi-urban area of Cameroon: choices and sources of antimalarials, self-treatment and resistance. D S Nsagha, A L Njunda, H L Kamga, Pan Afr Med J. 98Nsagha DS, Njunda AL, Kamga HL, et al. Knowledge and practices relating to malaria in a semi-urban area of Cameroon: choices and sources of antimalarials, self-treatment and resistance. Pan Afr Med J. 2011;9(8):1-20.
Fever in Africa: do patients know when they are hot?. E M Einterz, M E Bates, Lancet. 3509080781Einterz EM, Bates ME. Fever in Africa: do patients know when they are hot? Lancet. 1997;350(9080):781.
Feasibility and acceptability of artemisinin-based combination therapy for the home management of malaria in four African sites. I O Ajayi, E N Browne, B Garshong, Malar J. 76Ajayi IO, Browne EN, Garshong B, et al. Feasibility and acceptability of artemisinin-based combination therapy for the home management of malaria in four African sites. Malar J. 2008;7:6.
The use of focus groups for idea generation: the effects of group size, acquintanceship and moderator on response quantity and quality. E J Fern, J Market Res. 19Fern EJ. The use of focus groups for idea generation: the effects of group size, acquintanceship and moderator on response quantity and quality. J Market Res. 1982;19:1-13.
Focus groups: a practical guide for applied research. R A Krueger, 1988London, UK: SageKrueger RA. Focus groups: a practical guide for applied research. London, UK: Sage; 1988:1-11.
The use of focus groups in social and behavioural research: some methodological issues. M E Khan, M Anker, B C Patel, S Berge, H Sadhwani, R Kohle, World Health Stat Q. 443Khan ME, Anker M, Patel BC, Berge S, Sadhwani H, Kohle R. The use of focus groups in social and behavioural research: some methodological issues. World Health Stat Q. 1991;44(3):145-149.
Local understandings, perceptions and practices of mothers and health care providers on childhood malaria in a Tanzania district -implications for malaria control. C Comoro, S E Nsimba, M Warsame, G Tomson, Acta Trop. 873Comoro C, Nsimba SE, Warsame M, Tomson G. Local understandings, perceptions and practices of mothers and health care providers on child- hood malaria in a Tanzania district -implications for malaria control. Acta Trop. 2003;87(3):305-313.
Recognition, treatment seeking behaviour and perception of cause of malaria among rural women in Uganda. J F Kengeya-Kayondo, J A Seely, E Kajura-Bajenja, Acta Trop. 583-4Kengeya-Kayondo JF, Seely JA, Kajura-Bajenja E, et al. Recognition, treatment seeking behaviour and perception of cause of malaria among rural women in Uganda. Acta Trop. 1994;58(3-4):267-273.
Perceptions of symptoms of severe childhood malaria among Mujikenda and Luo residents of coastal Kenya. H A Mwenesi, T Harphan, K Marsh, R W Snow, J Biosoc Sci. 272Mwenesi HA, Harphan T, Marsh K, Snow RW. Perceptions of symptoms of severe childhood malaria among Mujikenda and Luo residents of coastal Kenya. J Biosoc Sci. 1995;27(2):235-244.
A malaria control trial using insecticide-treated bed nets and targeted chemoprophylaxis in a rural area of The Gambia, west Africa. 4. Perceptions of the causes of malaria and its treatment and prevention in the study area. M K Aikins, H Pickering, P L Alonso, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 872SupplAikins MK, Pickering H, Alonso PL, et al. A malaria control trial using insecticide-treated bed nets and targeted chemoprophylaxis in a rural area of The Gambia, west Africa. 4. Perceptions of the causes of malaria and its treatment and prevention in the study area. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1993;87 Suppl 2:25-30.
Urban malaria and anaemia in children: a cross-sectional survey in two cities of Ghana. E Klinkenberg, P J Mccall, M D Wilson, Trop Med Int Health. 115Klinkenberg E, McCall PJ, Wilson MD, et al. Urban malaria and anae- mia in children: a cross-sectional survey in two cities of Ghana. Trop Med Int Health. 2006;11(5):578-588.
Health Centre versus home diagnosis of malaria in Southern Ghana: implications for home-based care policy. S K Dunyo, E A Afari, K A Koram, C K Ahorlu, I Abubakar, F K Nkrumah, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 943Dunyo SK, Afari EA, Koram KA, Ahorlu CK, Abubakar I, Nkrumah FK. Health Centre versus home diagnosis of malaria in Southern Ghana: implications for home-based care policy. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2000;94(3):285-288.
Fifteenth progress report. Geneva: World Health OrganizationWorld Health Organization. TDR Progress 1999-2000: Fifteenth prog- ress report. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2001.
Operational Guidelines for Home Management of malaria in Cameroon. National Malaria Control Programme. Public Ministry, Health, Ministry of Public Health. Operational Guidelines for Home Manage- ment of malaria in Cameroon. National Malaria Control Programme. June, 2004.
Knowledge and practices relating to malaria in Ndu community of Cameroon: signs and symptoms, causes and prevention. D S Nsagha, A L Njunda, H L Kamga, J Public Health Epid. 36Dovepress Dovepresssubmit your manuscript | www.dovepress.comNsagha DS, Njunda AL, Kamga HL, et al. Knowledge and practices relating to malaria in Ndu community of Cameroon: signs and symptoms, causes and prevention. J Public Health Epid. 2011;3(6):294-300. submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress


6084901:Feasibility and acceptability of home-based management of malaria strategy adapted to Sudan's conditions using artemisinin-based combination therapy and rapid diagnostic test


Conclusion:

outcome of their new tasks. As well, volunteers have initiated advocacy campaigns supported by their village health committees which were found to have a positive role to play in the project that proved their acceptability of the HMM design. The planned system for supply was found to be effective. The project was found to improve the accessibility to ACTs from 25% to 64.7% and the treatment seeking behaviour from 83.3% to 100% before-and after the HMM implementation respectivly.
The evaluation of the project identified the feasibility of the planned model in Sudan's condition. Moreover, the communities as well as the volunteers found to be satisfied with and supportive to the system and the outcome. The problem of treating other febrile cases when diagnosis is not malaria and other non-fever cases needs to be addressed as well.

Background

Despite the great efforts exerted by the national and international communities, malaria is still one of the major public health problems [1]. Recently the World Health Organization (WHO) has advocated for expansion and acceleration of malaria elimination efforts [2][3][4]. To achieve this, the problem of accessibility to effective treatment should be solved, more emphasis should be directed towards confirmed malaria diagnosis, and coverage with suitable protective measures should be greatly increased.
Effective management of malaria requires that the consumers and the care-givers, seek, obtain, and use drugs appropriately [5]. This should be linked to timely decision, accessibility, correct use of the drugs and follow-up after prescription. Malaria in children under five years of age requires mothers to recognize early the malaria symptoms, in particularly fever. This recognition in addition to classification by caregivers is a key to intervention [6]. In this context, Home Malaria Management (HMM) has become one of the important strategies to reach this precious target of malaria elimination [7,8].
Inaccuracy in confirmation of malaria status using microscopy can lead to patient mismanagement. Although diagnosing malaria solely on the clinical feature can reduce the risk of missing malaria cases, but it can lead to overtreatment and thus increasing the pressure on drugs and predisposing to appearance of resistant strains. Using Rapid Diagnostic Tests (RDT) may show evidence of costeffectiveness for this approach [9,10].
Malaria in Sudan was determined as one of the most devastating problem that led to loss of 2,877,000 DALYs in the year 2002 and was identified as a common cause of fever [11,12]. Possible contributing factors leading to this grave situation include floods, draught, famine, widely extended irrigated schemes without enough consideration to health component and population movement (internal displacement and influx of refugees). The situation may be further aggravated by insecticide resistance and by the spread of Plasmodium falciparum resistant strains [13][14][15]. On a background of a widespread chloroquine resistant P. falciparum, Sudan has changed its treatment policy to artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) in 2004, with artesunate plus sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (AS/ SP) as the first-line treatment for uncomplicated malaria. This did not solve the problem since accessibility to health services is still a barrier.
Late consultation (in average 3 days) for fever/malaria treatment is another barrier [16]. Mothers with febrile children seek care at home with what available at hand (herbs, remaining drugs, drugs from shops, and tepid sponging) and then shifted to health workers if there is no response or if the condition worsened. This in addition to low coverage with health facilities, dissatisfaction with services, difficulty to reach the facilities especially during rainy season, believes and satisfaction with traditional medicine and herbs, and user fees represents important contributing factors to late consultation. Another two things influencing consultation were the severely ill child need urgent consultation and hence shorten the duration; and appearance of illness at night deter the child from health facilities care waiting for the sun to rise and hence prolong the duration. This practice was similar to what reported by others [6,[17][18][19]. Self-treatment was common as stated by community leaders and health personnel in the area, which didn't vary from results obtained from central Sudan [20].
The aim of this research was to evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of HMM via volunteers using ACT and RDTs in Sudan's condition. Special focus of this study was laid on assessing the followings: volunteers performance in terms of compliance with the study treatment guidelines, RDT use, referral instructions, registration and reporting; volunteers satisfaction with the proposed motivation scheme; feasibility of the designed system for medicines and commodities supply, distribution and storage; and acceptability of the planned HMM system by the community.

Methods


Study settings

During the period May 2007 and January 2008, the study was conducted in Um Adara area in South Kordofan state ( Figure 1). The area is composed of 43 villages with an average population of around 75,000 including nomadic. Nomadic has a seasonal north and south movement tracing water sources (rain fall) and grass for their cattle. The area is classified as hypo-to meso-endemic -as per the National Malaria Control Programme stratification. Malaria transmission is associated mainly with the rainy season, which extends on average from May to November. In general the access to villages in the area is somewhat difficult notably in the rainy season. Twenty villages in this area were selected because of the availability of previous information regarding treatment seeking behaviour [16] and relative accessibility for supervision purposes.

Subject and intervention

The study was designed to provide malaria diagnosis and treatment services to the communities as close to their residence as possible through a volunteer provider named as "Malaria Control Assistant" [MCA]. MCAs were selectedone per village-by their communities according to specified characteristics provided by the study team including availability in the area most of the time, acceptability by the community, reading and writing ability, and willingness to work as volunteer. Training of MCAs was focused on identification of malaria cases using rapid diagnostic test (RDT) and treating them with AS/SP, identification of severe malaria clinical presentation and giving pre-referral treatment in form of artesunate suppositories, and picking up other danger signs and non malaria cases for referral. Recording and reporting of information related to the cases was also addressed, as well as stock management. Training was done for seven days by medical doctor and laboratory technician working in the Malaria Control Programme. A simple training module was developed by the study team that involved problem solving, group work, exercises, demonstration and practical sessions.
Drugs and RDTs used for the project were assessed and found to be satisfactory in their stability and performance, respectively, as their assessment results revealed. ACTs stability was done in the National Drugs Quality Control Laboratory. The overall efficacy of AS/SP in Sudan was 98.5% in 2007 as per the National Malaria Control Programme anti-malarial drugs monitoring results. AS/SP used for the study were from Guilin Pharmaceutical Co., China; and the artesunate suppositories were from Mepha, Switzerland. RDTs readings were blindly checked against microscopy examination for the same patients by different laboratory technician in the Central Malaria Reference Laboratory, which showed a 97% and 100% sensitivity and specificity respectively. RDTs were brought for the study from Acon Laboratories, United States of America. The malaria parasitological prevalence was done in the same communities and individuals targeted by the HHS, using microscopy examination. Blind cross-reading of slides took place for quality assurance purposes.
MCAs worked on non-monetary incentives but only a One Sudanese Pound (equivalent to US$0.5) consultation fee, which was assured to be reasonable when discussed with the community leaders. So no salaries were arranged for MCAs and they work as volunteers on this base. No other mean of incentive was used rather than the community respect.
To assure adequate understanding and adherence to the project guidelines, monthly supervisory visits and meetings -including clinical cases and problems discussions-in the first three months took place; then weaned over time. Supplies and essential equipments were provided free through the nearest health facility, which became the link between MCAs and the ordinary health system. Sensitization and advocacy for the communities to use the HMM services was started earlier in the process in each village. Community leaders played a great roll in this process. The graduation of MCAs was attended by a well community representation, when it became a chance to further advocate for the project. Thereafter, an advocacy campaigns were done. Furthermore, MCAs took the continuous process of advocacy during villagers' social events. In each village, a village health committee was established from the already available and acceptable community leaders. The aim was to support, facilitate and supervise the work of their MCA.

Map showing Sudan and Um Adarah area


Assessment method

Three tools were used to collect data to evaluate the outcome both before (on May 2007) and after (on January 2008) intervention; pre-coded and pre-tested questionnaire (for household survey (HHS)), focus group discussions guide (for focus group discussions (FGD) with community leaders), and structured interview (SI) guide (for interview with MCAs). The HHS targeted to evaluate the treatment seeking behaviour, malaria parasitaemia prevalence, and use of preventive measures; whereas FGD was concerned with community acceptability of the HMM and MCA. On the other hand, the SI was conducted to assess MCAs acceptability, views and barriers regarding the intervention. Records and reports analysis -including supervisory reports-were used to evaluate the adherence to the study protocol and assessing the HMM system for supplies, distribution and storage. Using EPIInfo software, 10 villages were randomly selected for the survey and FGDs. In each village 20 households were randomly chosen where all their inhabitants were then targeted by the survey questionnaire. FGDs with community leaders were conducted in the same survey villages.

Data management

Trained social workers were used to collect data. Data was compiled and entered using SPSS version 11.5 and excel software packages. Appropriate tests (x 2 and t tests) were used to compare between pre-and post-intervention results.

Ethical considerations

The study received ethical clearance of the Federal Ministry of Health, Sudan. Informed consent was taken from both community leaders and individuals. Data were used in high confidentiality and no names were used.

Results

The study community There were 23,733 inhabitants in the selected 20 villages for the intervention. Of them 33.1% were under five and the mean number of household members was 4.4. The female represented 59%. Most of the population surveyed were either children (under the age of 13 years) (40.4%), housewives (17.2%), students (17.2%), or farmers (21.5%); and 70.2% of them were non-educated while only 2.6% and 0.3% were graduated from the secondary schools and/or university as their highest level of education respectively. Malaria parasitological prevalence (prerainy season survey) was found to be 0.1% with P. falciparum as the only prevailing species. The proportion of households who had any case of malaria (presumptive diagnosis) during the last season was found to be between 40 -100% and the number of malaria deaths per village during the last season range between 0 -4, most of them were children as stated by the community leaders during the FGDs. The majority of the population sought treatment for the last episode of fever from public health facilities (98.5%), which were 2 -30 km far from their home but 66% of it were >5 km long as picked up from the HHS. The means for transportation for referral of cases during rainy season varied between: on foot, donkeys, carts, bicycles, and cars; but some villages were inaccessible at all as the community leaders said. The problems associated with malaria treatment were described by the community leaders as: accessibility to health services, drugs were not cheap and most of the time was difficult to find, treatment was on clinical bases, and treatment sometimes was not satisfactory and patients needed to be referred elsewhere.
Mosquito nets were available in more than one third of surveyed households, of them more than a halve were insecticide-treated (ITNs) and the majority were long-lasting (LLINs). Conversely, the usage did not match the availability (Table 1).

MCAs performance

MCAs were proposed and selected by village committees. If there was any person with previous health experience then no need for new person to work as MCA. The information gained from SIs with the 20 selected MCAs determined that all of them were male and their mean age was 38.2 years. The educational level varies between: religious school (5%), primary (35%), intermediate (25%), and secondary (35%); where the main profession was community health worker (40%), farmer (50%), merchant (5%), and employee (5%). Forty five percent of them have previous experience of treating malaria (some as community health workers and others gained knowledge by self trials and experience). All health workers of the MCAs had other profession to do; either farmer, merchant or live stock herder.
With regards to adherence to project guidelines as evaluated by supervisory visits and records and reports analysis, only one MCA was not adhered to the treatment guidelines (hence excluded from analysis where appropriate), but all MCAs' approach in managing patients and referring severe cases were accepted ( Table 2). Two MCAs had a problem in stock management and usage and interpretation of RDTs, which did not significantly vary in terms of having previous experience in malaria treatment or level of education (P values 1.00 and 0.66 respectively). Six MCAs (30%) did not rely on RDTs results and treating patients with negative RDT results on their clinical sense equating fever with malaria, which did not significantly vary in terms of having previous experience in malaria treatment or level of education as well (P value 0.64 and 0.49 respectively).
All MCAs registration and reports were accepted. Most (95%) of the MCAs adhered to the project design in attending scheduled meetings and submitting their monthly reports. That was 85% (17/19) of them was attending the meetings on regular bases, and 10% (2/20) had accepted reasons for their absence, delay in meetings, or late reports submission.
Moreover, MCAs (65% of them (13/20)) had initiated educational and health promotional activities and campaigns which were appreciated and supported by their communities.
From those who had previous experience in malaria treatment, 37.5% (3/8) had problem in convincing clients that they had malaria before implementation of the project, compared to 5.3% (1/19) who had the same problem after the implementation (P. value 0.064). On the other hand, 50% (4/8) faced a problem of persuading someone that he had no malaria; compared to 21% (4/19) for post intervention group that used RDTs (P. value 0.02) as picked up through SIs. Eighteen out of nineteen (94.7%) of the MCAs did accept seeing patients at night for consultation and this did not harm him in any way. A similar proportion (94.7%) of MCAs felt the social and spiritual outcome of this work was persuasive for and appreciated by them and their families. Vice versa, 36.8% (7/19) was assuming that the financial outcome (the consultation fees) of this work was not satisfied for them, and all of them felt that the financial gain was not enough to the degree that lead them to leave their original work.
Village health committees (95%, 19/20 of committees) together with their villagers supported their MCA by either providing or building a room to be a clinic. As per the SIs findings, most (73.7%, 14/19) of village health committees were active in visiting their MCA in his clinic and/or house and discussing with him his work and his problems; since 68.4% had visited their MCA at least once every two months and only 21.1% had never visited their MCA. This was reflected by the perception of the 84.2% (16/19) of the MCAs that their village health committees had a positive impact in his work ( Table 3).
The system for ACTs and RDTs supply and distribution were found to be effective since no MCA reported stock out or complaint of difficulties in replenish their stock or even having difficulties in access to that.

Treatment-seeking behaviour

The prevalence of households with fever case within the last two weeks prior to the survey was identified as 24% and 8.5% of the total households surveyed (200 households) in the pre-and post-intervention surveys respectively (P. value 0.000). Out of those houses with fever cases, 83.3% (40/48) of the mothers sought treatment for their febrile child prior to the implementation of the HMM project which was increased to 100% (17/17) after the implementation (P. value 0.099). Of them, 25% (10/ 40) sought treatment within their villages, compared to 64.7% (11/17) for pre-and post-project implementation (P. value 0.004). Concerning severe malaria, two and one cases were noticed within the last six months before and after the availability of HMM services respectively. The number of deaths in the last season before the project was 61, and it was only one after implementation of the project (P. value 0.000). Of them, 100% and 0.0% were <5 years old (P. value 0.016) for pre and post intervention groups respectively.

Patients treated with MCAs

The HMM project served a population of more than 23,000 residents. A total of 3,745 patients were treated during the period June -December 2007. Of them 17.6% (659 patients) were children under 5 years. MCAs during the same period referred 35 (0.9%) cases to the nearest hospital, diagnosing them as having other febrile conditions rather than malaria. MCAs reported 7 (0.2%) deaths in their respective villages with variable causes of deaths. MCAs also reported 7 (0.2%) cases as having mild side effects coincided with ACT use.

Satisfaction with the project

When the issue of HMM was discussed with the village community leaders in an organized focus groups, all villagers said that they knew that there is an MCA available in their village to treat malaria cases and give advice for MCAs attending all scheduled meetings 17 85% other conditions. They got the message through different channels like the village health committees, social gatherings, mosques, meeting with other villagers, MCAs themselves, neighbours and relatives within the village, patients those were treated by MCA, and the graduation celebration of the MCAs. The message that they receive was that the diagnosis and treatment of malaria was within the villages from a trained personnel. Those who made use of the HMM services acknowledged it because it was easy, nearby and cheep service. As well, they mentioned that the selected MCAs were accepted by them because of their honest, the way they were dealing with their patients, activity, had a time for their patients and their own work, from the villagers, and knew what to do. No one described any obstacles hindering the continuation of the project; but they ask for expansion of the project to involve other diseases. All villagers found to be eager for the continuation of the project after the end of the pilot due to the burden of disease that was released from their communities.

Discussion

HMM was proud to be an effective method in reducing disease burden and solving the problem of access to health services [21][22][23][24][25][26]. Hence, the scope of this study beyond this goal was to assess the feasibilty and acceptbility of this method in Sudan's situation. Moreover this study was built on ACTs and RDTs use by volunteers.
Admitedly, the only suitable interevention regarding malaria control in rural poor setings and far to reach communities are early and proper case management and high coverage and usage of ITNs. This study revealed that the coverage of ITNs is somewhat low but allmost all of them were LLINs. Beside that, the usage was very limited which is an open area for promotional interventions.
Having previous experience in managing malaria or being educated did not significantly tend to affect the outcome of MCAs performance or the rely on RDTs result in treating fever cases, despite the general variation in taking the RDTs results in mind whent diagnosing and treating fever. Chandler found that patient demand was not found to be driving the over-prescription of anti-malarials. To the contrary, the involvement of patients may provide an opportunity to improve prescribing practice if their expectations for test and treatment in line with test results can be effectively communicated [27]. Nevertheless, RDTs were found to have less significant effect in conveincing febrile patients with their diagnosis. With its simple use and despite the incremental cost compared with microscopy, RDTs proved its ability in increasing the percentage of patients correctly treataed; but cost-effectiveness would be worse if prescribers do not comply with test results [28].
MCAs proof their ability to record and report cases and in using the format for registration and reporting. On the other hand, the project increased the treatment seeking behavior and increased the access to anti-malarial drugs at village level. Such results were identified elsewhere in similar settings [5,7,22,26,29].
Despite the low income of the MCAs from the HMM project, MCAs and their families were found to be saticfied with the social and spiritual outcome of providing such a services for their comminties. The fact that MCAs did not leave their original proffesions, can be an important factor for the sustainability of the project and should be followed in the future design for such initiatives.
The role of the community in sellecting their MCAs was found to be importnt. As well, the invovement of villagers in supervising and supporting the project was of graet value in keeping the project implemeted in ease. Furthermore, the community were satisfied by the projet implementation and had the interest of expansion of the project to cover other common diseases. Community satisfaction did not varies with MCAs who had previous experience in managing malaria or with the others.
With regards to MCAs commitment with the HMM programme plan, they were found to be very adherent to meeting attendance and reporting dates. When coming to ACTs and RDTs supply, storage and distribution system; it was proved to be satisfiing. Furthermore, MCAs has performed well in intiation of health promotional and community mobilization activities in their communities. One of the good ways to advocate for the project and mobilize the community to uptake the HMM services were found to be the interpersonal communication methodes and tools done by the investigators and the MCAs themselves.

Conclusion

Making use of this method in implementing the HMM project in Sudan seems to be promising. The use of the RDTs in such condition is fundamental since it help in supporting the diagnosis and the trust in volunteers.
Although the project needs some adaptation, but its general feasibility and acceptability was proved. The expansion of the project to include Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) targeted diseases and in particularly those causing fever looks sound in reducing the overall morbidity and mortality.
ing teams, and designed the study materials. TA and AHE were involved in the study design, implementation and analysis. MAM and AHE were the focal persons for the training, monitoring and quality assessment of the RDTs and the study drugs respectively. SHA was the focal person for the surveys, interviews, FGDs and social mobilization in the study. IA has contributed in the study design, monitoring and editing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript.

Figure 1

1Map showing Sudan and Um Adarah area.

Table 1 :

1Background information of the surveyed population, Um Adarah area, 2007Variables 
Pre-intervention 
N = 892
Age in years -Mean (SD, min -max) 
17.8 (17.7, 0.01-95)
Family size -Mean (SD, min -max) 
4.4 (1.7, 1-10)
Female ratio 
59.0%
Under fives ratio 
33.1%
Occupation: 
Housewives 
17.2% 
Child (under the age of 13 years) 
40.4% 
Student 
17.2% 
Farmer 
21.5% 
Officer 
1.0% 
Others 
2.8%
Level of education: 
Non-educated 
70.2% 
Religious school 
4.7% 
Basic school 
22.2% 
Secondary school 
2.6% 
University 
0.3%
Parasitic prevalence 
0.1%
Place of treatment: 
Public 
98.5% 
Private 
1.0% 
At home 
0.5%
Distance to health services: 
<5 km 
34.0% 
5-10 
22.5% 
>10 
43.5%
Use of preventive measures 
Windows screened (N = 200) 
2.0% 
Mosquito nets available (N = 872) 
34.8% 
The available nets are ITNs (N = 436) 
59.0%% 
ITNs available are LLINs (N = 318) 
95.1%% 
Usage of net last night (N = 427) 
2.9%

Table 2 :

2MCAs adherence to project guides, Um Adarah area, 2007Skills/criteria

Table 3 :

3MCAs post intervention perception and attitude, Um Adarah area, 2007Skills/criteria
(page number not for citation purposes)
AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to be grateful for the efforts of the hosting community in Um Adara, the MCAs, and the local authorities in South Kordofan State. The support and facilitation from TDR/EMRO, WHO/EMRO, WHO/ Head Quarter, and Istituto Superiore did Sanità, Roma. This study was funded by TDR/EMRO.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.KAEAuthors' contributions
WHO: World Malaria Report Technical report. Geneva, World Health Organization. WHO: World Malaria Report Technical report. Geneva, World Health Organization; 2008.
WHO: Global malaria control and elimination Technical Consultation Report. Geneva, World Health Organization. WHO: Global malaria control and elimination Technical Consultation Report. Geneva, World Health Organization; 2008.
WHO: Malaria elimination: A field manual for low and moderate endemic countries Geneva, Global Malaria Programme. WHO: Malaria elimination: A field manual for low and moderate endemic countries Geneva, Global Malaria Programme; 2007.
WHO: Informal consultation on malaria elimination: setting up the WHO agenda Technical Consultation Report. Geneva, World Health OrganizationWHO: Informal consultation on malaria elimination: setting up the WHO agenda Technical Consultation Report. Geneva, World Health Organization; 2006.
WHO: Roll Back Malaria Strategic Framework for Scaling up Effective Malaria Case Management. WHO: Roll Back Malaria Strategic Framework for Scaling up Effective Malaria Case Management 2004 [http://www.rbm.who.int/partnership/ wg/wg_management/docs/framework.pdf].
Recognizing childhood illnesses and their traditional explanations: exploring options for care-seeking interventions in the context of the IMCI strategy in rural Ghana. Z Hill, C Kendali, P Arthur, B Kirkwood, E Adjei, Trop Med Int Health. 8Hill Z, Kendali C, Arthur P, Kirkwood B, Adjei E: Recognizing child- hood illnesses and their traditional explanations: exploring options for care-seeking interventions in the context of the IMCI strategy in rural Ghana. Trop Med Int Health 2003, 8:668-676.
Roll Back Malaria Department: The Roll Back Malaria Strategy for Improving Access to Treatment: Through Home Management of Malaria. WHO. WHO, Roll Back Malaria Department: The Roll Back Malaria Strategy for Improving Access to Treatment: Through Home Management of Malaria 2005.
Roll Back Malaria department: Scaling up Home-based Management of Malaria. WHO. WHO, Roll Back Malaria department: Scaling up Home-based Manage- ment of Malaria 2004.
Diagnosis of malaria in a remote area of the Philippines: comparison of techniques and their acceptance by health workers and the community. D Bell, R Go, C Miguel, J Walker, L Cacal, A Saul, Bull World Health Organ. 79Bell D, Go R, Miguel C, Walker J, Cacal L, Saul A: Diagnosis of malaria in a remote area of the Philippines: comparison of techniques and their acceptance by health workers and the community. Bull World Health Organ 2001, 79:933-941.
Operational response to malaria epidemics: are rapid diagnostic tests cost-effective. E Rolland, F Checchi, L Pinoges, S Balkan, J Guthmann, P J Guerin, Trop Med Int Health. 11Rolland E, Checchi F, Pinoges L, Balkan S, Guthmann J, Guerin PJ: Operational response to malaria epidemics: are rapid diag- nostic tests cost-effective. Trop Med Int Health 2006, 11:398-408.
The burden of malaria in Sudan: incidence, mortality and disability -adjusted life -years. S I Abdalla, E M Malik, K M Ali, Malar J. 697Abdalla SI, Malik EM, Ali KM: The burden of malaria in Sudan: incidence, mortality and disability -adjusted life -years. Malar J 2007, 6:97.
Malaria in Sudan: past, present and the future. E M Malik, O K Saeed, Gazera Journal of Health Sciences. 1Malik EM, Saeed OK: Malaria in Sudan: past, present and the future. Gazera Journal of Health Sciences 2004, 1:47-53.
Anopheles arabiensis: abundance and insecticide resistance in an irrigated area of eastern Sudan. Himeidan Yel, -S Dukeen, M Y El-Rayah El-A, Adam I , East. Mediterr Health J. 10Himeidan Yel-S, Dukeen MY, El-Rayah el-A, Adam I: Anopheles ara- biensis: abundance and insecticide resistance in an irrigated area of eastern Sudan. East. Mediterr Health J 2004, 10:167-174.
Antimalarial drug resistance in the Eastern Mediterranean Region. Abdel-Hameed Aa, East Mediterr Health J. 9Abdel-Hameed AA: Antimalarial drug resistance in the Eastern Mediterranean Region. East Mediterr Health J 2003, 9:492-508.
Efficacies of chloroquine, sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine and quinine in the treatment of uncomplicated, Plasmodium falciparum malaria in eastern Sudan. I Adam, M E Osman, G Elghzali, G I Ahmed, L L Gustafssons, M I Elbashir, Ann Trop Med Parasitol. 98Adam I, Osman ME, Elghzali G, Ahmed GI, Gustafssons LL, Elbashir MI: Efficacies of chloroquine, sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine and quinine in the treatment of uncomplicated, Plasmodium falci- parum malaria in eastern Sudan. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2004, 98:661-666.
Treatmentseeking behaviour for malaria in children under five years of age: implication for home management in rural areas with high seasonal transmission in Sudan. E M Malik, K Hanafi, S H Ali, E S Ahmed, K A Mohamed, Malar J. 560Malik EM, Hanafi K, Ali SH, Ahmed ES, Mohamed KA: Treatment- seeking behaviour for malaria in children under five years of age: implication for home management in rural areas with high seasonal transmission in Sudan. Malar J 2006, 5:60.
Mother's perceptions and knowledge on childhood malaria in the holoendemic Kibaha district, Tanzania: implications for malaria control and the IMCI strategy. D S Tarimo, G K Lwihula, J N Minjas, I C Bygbjerg, Trop Med Int Health. 5Tarimo DS, Lwihula GK, Minjas JN, Bygbjerg IC: Mother's percep- tions and knowledge on childhood malaria in the holoen- demic Kibaha district, Tanzania: implications for malaria control and the IMCI strategy. Trop Med Int Health 2000, 5:179-184.
Health care switching behaviour of malaria patients in a Kenyan rural community. I K Nyamongo, Soc Sci Med. 54Nyamongo IK: Health care switching behaviour of malaria patients in a Kenyan rural community. Soc Sci Med 2002, 54:377-86.
People's perception of malaria in mbarara. F Nuwaha, Trop Med Int Health. 7Nuwaha F: People's perception of malaria in mbarara, Uganda. Trop Med Int Health 2002, 7:462-470.
AA: Malaria case management at the community level in Gazira, Sudan. Abdel-Hameed , Afr J Med Sci. 30SupplAbdel-Hameed AA: Malaria case management at the commu- nity level in Gazira, Sudan. Afr J Med Sci 2000, 30(Suppl):43-46.
Local fever illness classifications: implications for home management of malaria strategies. J Nsungwa-Sabiiti, K Källander, X Nsabagasani, K Namusisi, G Pariyo, A Johansson, G Tomson, S Peterson, Trop Med Int Health. 9Nsungwa-Sabiiti J, Källander K, Nsabagasani X, Namusisi K, Pariyo G, Johansson A, Tomson G, Peterson S: Local fever illness classifica- tions: implications for home management of malaria strate- gies. Trop Med Int Health 2004, 9:1191-1199.
Teaching mothers to provide home treatment of malaria in Tigray, Ethiopia: a randomised trial. G Kidane, R H Morrow, Lancet. 356Kidane G, Morrow RH: Teaching mothers to provide home treatment of malaria in Tigray, Ethiopia: a randomised trial. Lancet 2000, 356:550-555.
Early treatment of childhood fevers with pre-packaged antimalarial drugs in the home reduces severe malaria morbidity in Burkina Faso. S B Sirima, A Konate, A B Tiono, N Convelbo, S Cousens, F Pagnoni, Trop Med Int Health. 8Sirima SB, Konate A, Tiono AB, Convelbo N, Cousens S, Pagnoni F: Early treatment of childhood fevers with pre-packaged anti- malarial drugs in the home reduces severe malaria morbid- ity in Burkina Faso. Trop Med Int Health 2003, 8:133-139.
Primary care training for patent medicine vendors in rural Nigeria. F O Oshiname, W R Brieger, Soc Sci Med. 35Oshiname FO, Brieger WR: Primary care training for patent medicine vendors in rural Nigeria. Soc Sci Med 1992, 35:1477-1484.
Interactions between patent medicine vendors and customers in urban and rural Nigeria. W R Brieger, P E Osamor, K K Salami, O Oladepo, S A Otusanya, Health Policy Plan. 19Brieger WR, Osamor PE, Salami KK, Oladepo O, Otusanya SA: Interactions between patent medicine vendors and custom- ers in urban and rural Nigeria. Health Policy Plan 2004, 19:177-182.
Improving malaria home treatment by training drug retailers in rural Kenya. V M Marsh, W M Mutemi, A Willetts, K Bayah, S Were, A Ross, K Marsh, Trop Med Int Health. 9Marsh VM, Mutemi WM, Willetts A, Bayah K, Were S, Ross A, Marsh K: Improving malaria home treatment by training drug retailers in rural Kenya. Trop Med Int Health 2004, 9:451-460.
. Cir Chandler, R Mwangi, H Mbakilwa, R Olomi, Cjm Whitty, H Reyburn, Health Policy Plan. 23Malaria overdiagnosis: is patient pressure the problemChandler CIR, Mwangi R, Mbakilwa H, Olomi R, Whitty CJM, Reyburn H: Malaria overdiagnosis: is patient pressure the problem. Health Policy Plan 2008, 23:170-178.
The Cost-Effectiveness of Parasitologic Diagnosis for Malaria-Suspected Patients in an Era of Combination Therapy. Y Lubell, H Reyburn, H Mbakilwa, R Mwangi, K Chonya, Cjm Whitty, A Mills, Am J Trop Med Hyg. 77Lubell Y, Reyburn H, Mbakilwa H, Mwangi R, Chonya K, Whitty CJM, Mills A: The Cost-Effectiveness of Parasitologic Diagnosis for Malaria-Suspected Patients in an Era of Combination Ther- apy. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2007, 77:128-132.
Letter to editor: Artemisinin-based comination treatment in home-based management of malaria. F Pagnoni, J Kengeya-Kayondo, R Ridley, W Were, F Nafo-Traore, J Namboze, S Sirima, Trop Med Int Health. 10Pagnoni F, Kengeya-Kayondo J, Ridley R, Were W, Nafo-Traore F, Namboze J, Sirima S: Letter to editor: Artemisinin-based com- ination treatment in home-based management of malaria. Trop Med Int Health 2005, 10:621-622.


7359381:Community acceptability of use of rapid diagnostic tests for malaria by community health workers in Uganda


Background

Globally 3.2 billion people remain at risk of malaria and nearly one million malaria deaths occur each year, mostly in children under five years of age in sub-Saharan Africa [1]. Besides neonatal-related causes, malaria is the second leading cause of morbidity and mortality in Africa, and accounts for 21-26% of all under-five mortality in Uganda [2,3]. Many of these deaths occur at home due to poor access to health care, inappropriate or delayed care seeking and inadequate quality of health services [2,4]. Based on the current body of evidence, community health workers (CHWs) can play an important role in increasing coverage of essential interventions for child survival [5]. One such strategy recommended by WHO and UNICEF is Home Management of Malaria (HMM) which has been shown to be effective in reducing malaria mortality and morbidity in under-five children in a number of malaria endemic countries [6][7][8].
Since 2002, Uganda has adopted and implemented HMM at scale, locally referred to as Home Based Management of Fever (HBMF) strategy [9][10][11]. Under HBMF, community medicine distributors (CMDs) provided unit-dosed prepackaged Homapak™ (chloroquine and sulphadoxine/pyrimethamine -CQ + SP) presumptively to children that presented with, or had a history of fever [9]. More than 45% of first care contact for under-five children with fever was obtained through HBMF in program areas [12], and Kilian et al [13] found that caregivers of children had high acceptability towards Homapak™. Due to increase in resistance to CQ and SP, in 2006 the National Malaria Control Programme (NMCP) made a policy change to cost-free artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) at all levels of the health system -including community level. Coartem®, the ACT that is in use Uganda is composed of a fixed combination of 20 mg of artemether and 120 mg of lumefantrine and is supplied in prepacked weight-and age-specific forms. There are concerns that the introduction of such a highly efficacious but expensive new treatment at community level, with reliance on presumptive diagnosis alone, may lead to excessive use, increased costs and risk of development of resistance [14,15].
The encouraging decline in malaria prevalence that has been observed in several African countries where integrated malaria control strategies have been implemented on a large scale [16][17][18][19][20] may also amplify the risk of misdiagnosis of fever episodes in absence of malaria diagnostic tools [21]. With policies that recommend presumptive treatment of fever, health workers and caretakers are less likely to look for other causes of fever, leading to delay in appropriate treatment and higher case fatality rates among non-malaria fevers than in malaria fevers [22]. There is limited evidence that shows change in malaria prevalence in the recent past in Uganda [23].
Given that rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) are now available with sensitivities comparable to routine microscopy in detecting malaria [24][25][26][27] these tests are now increasingly being seen as an alternative to improve diagnosis and quality of care of febrile children in malarious areas [10,28]. RDTs are now being rolled out in many countries to all tiers of the formal health care system to guide malaria treatment decisions in routine care [29]. The potential role of RDTs in HMM is still highly debated; a facility based study in Tanzania found some caregivers with reservations about RDTs for malaria, thinking they were HIV test kits [30]. Studies from sub-Saharan Africa [31][32][33] document community stigma about drawing blood that may impede acceptability of RDTs. In addition, English et al [34] argue that there is inadequate evidence to support abandoning presumptive treatment and that African health systems have yet to demonstrate the capacity to support a shift toward laboratory-confirmed diagnosis rather than presumptive treatment of malaria in children under five. Some of these concerns include the implications of not providing treatment to childern with false-negative test results. Finally, diffusion of innovations in the health system depend on individuals' perceptions of the innovation, characteristics of the individual who may adopt the change, and contextual factors within the community [35]. It is still unclear what role RDTs will play in a situation where HBMF recommendations are blended with local and biomedical knowledge, and little is known about whether the community will accept the use of RDTs in the hands of CMDs with low education level and no formal health care background. The aim of this study was, therefore, to explore community acceptability of the use of RDTs for malaria diagnosis by CMDs within the context of community case management of fever in children under five in Uganda.

Methods


Study area

The study was conducted in the rural Ugandan district of Iganga as part of a larger study on the feasibility of deploying RDTs at community level in Uganda (Clinical Trials.gov Identifier NCT00720811). Uganda has an estimated population of 34 million inhabitants of whom about 80% live in rural areas. The economy is predominantly agricultural with the majority of the population dependent on subsistence farming. Iganga District is located in South Eastern Uganda, approximately 112 km from Kampala, the capital city of Uganda. Iganga district is served by a 200-bed capacity hospital, and 81 health centres at county, sub-county and parish level. The main local language spoken in the district is Lusoga. Iganga has high transmission rates (holoendemic) for malaria [36]. HBMF was started in Iganga district in 2003 with district-wide 3-day training of CMDs in use of Homapak®. All the CMDs were retrained over 3 days in using Coartem® in 2006, but due to inadequate stocks of ACT at national level the medicines were limited to facility-based deployment and were not deployed through CMDs during this study period. The study was conducted in August 2008 in the sub-county of Namungalwe, which has a total population of 32,911 in seven parishes and 19 villages. There are a total of 48 CMDs in the sub-county, majority of who are female and have attained some secondary school education. The sub-county of Namungalwe was selected because of a planned intervention study that will introduce the use of RDTs by CMDs.

Data collection

A qualitative research approach using Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) and Key Informant (KI) interviews was deemed appropriate for the study aim. Ten FGDs with 6-10 participants in each group were conducted with caregivers of under-five children and CMDs (Table 1). Whereas most fevers are managed by mothers, FGDs were also conducted separately with fathers, as they play a significant role in the health care seeking of sick children, especially when costs are incurred [37].
FGD participants were mobilized by the community leaders and purposively selected if they had ever cared for a child with fever. FGDs were conducted in different parishes, and took place in one of the homes of the participants to provide for privacy. Pre-designed interview guides were piloted and used to collect information on trust and confidence in CMDs, community willingness and acceptability of CMDs to use RDTs, anticipated challenges that CMDs could be faced with using RDTs, and stigma associated with taking blood from children in the community. Both the interviewer and the note taker were social scientists, spoke both English and the vernacular fluently and were experienced in conducting FGDs. The first FGDs were attended by two of the research team members who reviewed the notes afterwards. They also discussed with the interviewer and the note taker their experiences of the emerging issues and whether questions were being understood.
Key informant interviews were conducted with health workers and different community leaders (Table 1) to capture their experiences of CMD management of sick children, their perceptions of CMDs' abilities in using RDTs as part of the treatment of children with fever, anticipated challenges that CMDs could face with using RDTs and stigma associated with taking blood from children in the community. The research assistants were trained by the investigators on how to use the KI interview guide.
All the FGDs and KI interviews were conducted in the local language, transcribed and later translated into English by the interviewers. The participants had never seen nor had an RDT used on them, and during interviews the RDT test was described to the interviewees.

Data analysis

Manifest content analysis [38] was used to categorize key issues out of the data. The unit of analysis was the transcripts from FGDs and KIIs. The authors (DM, JT, JK, BM, GO and KK) read through the data, identified different issues and debated them, and eventually developed codes. A second review of the material was done that generated more codes, which were discussed and agreed upon. These codes were merged into categories and then into themes reflecting the study objectives and other emerging issues.

Ethical clearance

Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the WHO Ethical Review Committee, the Makerere University School of Public Health Institutional Review Board, and the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology. Presentations to the district health team for Iganga district, as well as to the local area authorities at the sub-county were made and permission obtained from them to conduct the study. Individual written (signed or thumb print) informed consent was obtained from each of the study participants for both key informant interviews and focus group discussions.

Results

There were four key findings of the study: (1) CMDs are trusted by their communities because of their commitment to voluntarism, accessibility, and the perceived effectiveness of the anti-malarial drugs used, and their activities have led to a perception of reduced workload among health workers in health facilities; (2) community members, health workers and CMDs welcomed the use of RDTs by CMDs provided they have sufficient education level, are trained in their use, and supported to follow up children; (3) fears were expressed that CMDs who collect blood using RDTs could expose the children to HIV, that the tests could be used to test children for HIV, or that the blood could be used for witchcraft; (4) CMDs were anticipated to face challenges with transport for follow up of patients and re-stocking of supplies, adults demanding to be tested, and caregivers insisting their children be treated instead of being referred.

Trust in and acceptability of CMDs managing children with fever

The role of CMDs in malaria management was well appreciated by the community since the CMDs were perceived to be accessible both physically and socially. Many community members reported trust and confidence in CMDs ability to handle sick children given their past experiences of helpful available CMDs.
"She [the CMD] even asks us to take our children when they are sick to give us drugs. She has been very good because even if I go to her place at night she opens and gives me drugs. Even if I find her in the garden digging she comes back home to give me medicine. I trust her." (FGD, female caregivers)
The spirit of volunteerism as demonstrated by CMDs not demanding to be paid for their services was greatly appreciated by community members, and their trust and confidence in the CMD services was often the main motivating factor for the CMDs to do voluntary work. The community members who had used the CMDs perceived the medicines provided to them as effective in treating children with malaria, and the recovery of sick children after treatment by CMDs was said to enhance the reputation of the CMDs amongst their neighbours and community.
"According to me, they [CMDs] have done commendable work. They have a good relationship with the people and they have helped them a lot. They have been effective in distributing Homapak® and Coar-tem®. I heard that the tablets are to be distributed freely and they are doing it -they fulfilled the intention. My twins are making 3 years and I've never taken them to hospital. They are treated at home and given Coartem®. They [CMDs] have never asked for money for treatment." (KI, community leader)
Health workers reported to have observed a reduced workload at the health facilities as a result of CMD management of children with fever in the communities.
"We have trained CMDs in many workshops. We taught them about the danger signs, so in case of such they refer them to the health centre immediately. The CMDs also sensitize the communities where they stay on malaria prevention. They have really helped us health workers. The work load has reduced. We appreciate [their contribution]". (KI, health worker) "There is a good relationship with us because they know where they stop. They know that they can't manage [everything] according to how they were trained. [For complicated cases] they immediately refer them to the health facilities. These people have really helped very much in the areas where they operate. We have not heard cases that a child has died at the CMDs level." (KI, health worker) However, there were also some reservations about CMDs performance in the management of malaria at community level. Some informants reported that CMDs are sometimes difficult to find and in some instances they are looked down upon by caregivers because they are not trained professionals. Others reported that medicine distribution is a difficult task and that CMDs can easily give medicines without understanding what the underlying problem is. Some KIs indicated that CMDs are not trusted because of their low level of education.
"In some cases [instances] they are minimized because they are not trained professionals. Medicine distribution [prescription] is very hard and they can easily give you medicine without understanding what you are suffering from. If you explain to him that you have malaria or that you are not feeling well, of cause; for him he has the medicine he just gives you". (FGD, male caregivers)

Opinions, concerns and acceptability of the use of RDTs by CMDs

Although it emerged that community members had some doubts about CMD skills, there was consistency across the FGDs and KIIs a high degree of confidence that CMDs can perform the test once they are provided with adequate training. This trust and confidence was based on the education level of the CMDs, their experience, as well as perceptions about their commitment to work.
"If a person is trustworthy in a small thing they can work equally well even in a bigger one. These people have worked well and we never got problems with them. If my child falls sick, I just cross the road to him instead of going to Namungalwe where a person from Marina [name of place outside Iganga] knows nothing about me." (FGD, male caregivers) Community members also echoed the need for refresher training for CMDs in addition to training on RDTs.
"That will be very good [introducing RDTs] only that they will need to be trained like how they were trained before starting to give out coartem."(KI, health worker) "I would second it [introducing RDTs] provided they are trained to do it safely. It is very important." (KI, community leader) CMDs expressed willingness to use RDTs as part of the services they provide, and are confident they can perform it if they receive adequate training. CMDs contended that they have been voluntarily distributing drugs and would now volunteer also for this new task. CMDs were optimistic that the community would welcome their use of RDTs.
"If they know that we have been trained, they will accept [the use of RDTs]. Even for the giving out drugs they first resisted but later accepted." (FGD, CMDs)
Also the majority of health workers supported the idea of CMDs conducting RDTs as long as they are given practical training to acquire additional skills, accurate information, and guidelines to ensure safety. They asserted that this is one way of taking services nearer to people, encourage early treatment seeking behaviour, and is one way of providing CMDs with additional skills crucial for managing malaria. They also appreciated the fact that the CMD treatment of malaria could be performed more effectively if an RDT was introduced, so as to distinguish between malaria and other types of fever.
"That is a good thing [the use of RDTs], and it will work because people have been coming here a lot because of malaria. So if it [RDT and malaria treatment] is taken near them it will help them so that a person knows what is required and will help them get early treatment. But these CMDs need to be given additional skills because they need to have enough information to avoid questions like why they are taking blood." (KI, health worker)

Fears and stigma associated with taking blood from children in the community

Even though most community members were positive towards the use of RDTs by CMDs, many had mixed feelings about the taking of blood from children. The fear included concerns that their children could get infected with HIV in the process of undertaking an RDT and that the blood could be used to test children for HIV rather than malaria.
"People have fears about blood and that it can lead to contracting HIV. It would also imply to some people that when they prick to test the blood, they think you are testing for HIV but not malaria. They believe you can prove malaria by mere looking at signs like vomiting, shivering, diarrhea and other basic signs." (KI, community leader) Another frequently mentioned concern was that the blood could end up in the wrong hands and be used for witchcraft.
"Since people use it [blood] for bewitching, someone can draw it from you without you being aware that it will be used for other things. If you have a co-wife she can use it to bewitch you to death or stop producing children. Some say that they use it as sacrifice." (FGD, female caregivers)

Challenges anticipated to hamper the success of CMD management of fever using RDTs

Given the tasks that the CMDs are given, views regarding the challenges that CMDs are likely to face were solicited. The reported challenges that were foreseen included that CMDs will lack transport for follow up of patients and for replenishment of supplies from the health facilities, that adults will try to force CMDs to also test them for malaria, that caregivers will insist that CMDs treat their children even when the child needs referral, and that some leaders will try to seek for favours for themselves and their relatives.
"I have seen some of them [CMDs] walking all the way to the health center to get drugs, and when following up children. They need to be assisted with transport for drugs". (FGD, male caregivers) "These tests [RDTs] will create a lot of interest. I am concerned that adults will also demand to be tested. I think also some of our people will insist that their children are treated when they should be referred as now CMDs will be seen as "little doctors" who can take blood and examine it". (KI, community leader)

Discussion

The study found that community medicine distributors (CMDs) were trusted by their communities because of their voluntary services, ease of access, and perceived effectiveness of the anti-malarial drugs they use. This is in line with the findings from a multi-country study (including Uganda) which showed high community acceptability of CMD management of sick children, with most children receiving treatment on the same day or within one day of onset of symptoms [39]. Kilian et al [13] found similar results in western Uganda, where women showed high acceptability of pre-packaged antimalarial drugs in the hands of CMDs. However, while Ajayi et al [39] also concluded that most caregivers perceived the anti-malarials used by CMDs to be effective, Nsabagasani et al [40] demonstrated that although caregivers concurred that they were benefiting from the CMD programme, the treatment was perceived as a drug of lower quality. The contradicting finding is likely to be a result of the type of medicine used, as Ajayi et al [39] evaluated the use of highly efficacious prepacked ACT, whereas Nsabagasani et al [40] evaluated the use of Homapak® (chloroquine and sulphadoxine/ pyrimethamine) -a combination drug known to have low clinical efficacy due to parasite resistance.
CMDs were trusted by health workers who recognized that the CMDs have contributed to a reduced workload in the health facilities. This concurs with what was found in a rural district in Burkina Faso, where a reduction in workload at peripheral health facilities was observed after HMM was implemented [41]. Similarly, HMM with ACT using community health workers who are supervised regularly was found to be feasible and acceptable by health workers in Ghana [42]. In resource constrained rural communities with geographically sparse health services, CMDs could fill a major gap in access to health care for under-five children [43]. The high level of community acceptability for HMM is likely a result of its convenience, given the fact that malaria risk is often highest in remote rural areas where the quality and coverage of health services is lowest [44].
In this study, the formal education level of CMDs appeared to be a key factor in their acceptability by the community, with CMDs with low education being viewed less positively. This finding needs to be explored further, as it could have major implications on what criteria should be used to select CMDs under home management of malaria (HMM) programmes. Current selection criteria for the community to consider when they choose their CMDs include: age, literacy levels, and gender but different districts and sub-districts may however, choose different criteria for nominating CMDs and ability to read and write may not be prioritized in certain areas [45]. If shown to be consistent across countries and programmes, this could have negative implications if RDTs are to be deployed. Alternatively, programs that want to scale up CMD use of RDTs would need to demonstrate that CMDs are able to use the test and that communities accept their services, regardless of education level.
A majority of community members, health workers and CMDs welcomed the use of RDTs by CMDs, provided that they are properly trained in their use. A similar study in Sudan also found community acceptability of Coartem® and RDTs in HMM to be high, with a marked increase in treatment-seeking behaviour following the implementation [46]. In the present study, the high community acceptability of RDTs was partly due to the appreciation that CMDs would be able to offer treatment which was based on test results rather than just presence of symptoms and signs.
While RDTs have the potential to greatly enhance the management of febrile illness [47] the success of their use in the hands of CMDs is highly dependent on how the community will accept the services provided. Health care policies such as HMM are often formulated at national level and need to take into account local cultural context; sometimes assumptions are made based on what can be communicated through simplified biomedical terms, and how this will result in behaviour change [48]. However, acceptability of medical care by different ethnic groups is associated with the degree to which the services meet cultural values, norms, and expectations [49]. These factors need to be taken into account to ensure successful uptake of community programs [50]. While a desirable, participatory process in every village is not compatible with rapid national scale-up -a balance needs to be reached [40]. Having CMDs of the same ethnic group, who speak the same language, and are familiar with the culture and its traditions and values are factors that can increase acceptability [51]. The findings of this study also show that the community demands for well trained CMDs to handle and interpret the tests -some critical characteristics also identified by Din and Bell [52]. Equally, programmes will need to address concerns about children with false negative results, as now CMDs will be required to without the ACT. If, however, the child is not followed closely and gets worse or even dies, this could potentially undermine the credibility of the entire programme. In the trial that followed this study, blood slides for microscopy were collected from each child on the same day; microscopy results for all RDT negative children were returned to the CMD within 24 hours to try and address this problem. This approach will not be possible in non-research settings.
Fears and stigma of taking blood of children in the community were common, relating both to risk of exposure to HIV and witchcraft. Myths about blood could have serious consequences to the HMM programme, especially if there is a bad outcome for a child. In Tanzania, though there was a high degree of provider and caregiver acceptance and satisfaction with RDTs, some caregivers had reservations about RDTs, with some thinking they were HIV test kits [30]. To counter for this potential threat to the programme, a well-designed behaviour change communication strategy will be required, since a successful HMM strategy relies not only on adequately trained CMDs and the availability of drugs, but also on a well informed community [53,43].
In this study, community members anticipated that CMDs would face difficulties with adults demanding to be tested and caregivers insisting that their children should be treated instead of being referred. Compliance to guidelines is often a major challenge and a study in Burkina Faso found very low health worker compliance to negative RDT results, as they still went on to prescribe anti-malarial drugs for patients who tested negative [54]. This was also observed in another study in Sudan [46]. These issues will require special attention through frequent supportive supervision meetings to monitor and assess performance, and during regular CMD mentoring sessions. It has been observed that lower level health workers are more likely to comply with guidelines as compared to more experienced or high cadre health workers [55]. A follow up study is planned to assess community acceptability of RDT use by CMDs following RDT deployment in HMM.

Methodological considerations

One of the limitations of qualitative methods is that the magnitude of a variable of interest across different categories of respondents cannot be measured. However, it was not the intent of this study to quantify the issues under study as a household survey is planned for this purpose. Triangulation of information from caregivers, health providers, CMDs and community and opinion leaders using both FGDs and KIIs, was a useful strategy for checking consistency and contradictions across and within groups [56,57]. The geographical spread of the FGDs allowed us to interview participants from across the study area, getting as close to representative views of the study population as practically possible. Separating women from men in the FGDs and focused questions to the research issues could have promoted free expression of the participants and also reduced answers given to please the researcher.

Conclusion

Use of rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) by community medicine distributors (CMDs) is likely to be acceptable by community members given that CMDs are properly trained, supported and provided logistical support. A well-designed behaviour change communication strategy is needed to address the anticipated programmatic challenges as well as community fears and stigma about drawing blood. Level of formal education may have to be a criterion for CHW selection into programmes deploying RDTs.

Table 1

1Number and mix of key informants and focus groups conductedKey Informant Interviews (KIIs) 
Number 
Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) 
Number
Health workers at local Health centre III 
2 
Female caregivers/mothers of children under five years 
4
Civil society leaders/teachers 
2 
Male caregivers/fathers of children under five years 
4
Local political leaders 
2 
Community medicine distributors (CMDs) 
2
Health unit management committee members 
2
Religious leaders 
2
Mukanga et al. Malaria Journal 2010, 9:203   http://www.malariajournal.com/content/9/1/203
Mukanga et al. Malaria Journal 2010, 9:203   http://www.malariajournal.com/content/9/1/203 Page 5 of 9
Mukanga et al. Malaria Journal 2010, 9:203   http://www.malariajournal.com/content/9/1/203 Page 6 of 9
Mukanga et al. Malaria Journal 2010, 9:203   http://www.malariajournal.com/content/9/1/203 Page 9 of 9
AcknowledgementsWe are grateful to the study participants, research assistants, sociologists Charles Mucunguzi and Collins Agaba for their support during data collection and analysis, Iganga district local council officials, and Ministry of Health Uganda. Stella Nyanzi gave useful input in the final stage of writing up the manuscript. This study received financial support from UNICEF/ UNDP/World Bank/WHO Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases, and from two separate grants from the Division for International Development DfID to the Makerere University School of Public Health (DeLPHE) and the Malaria Consortium (COMDIS RPC). Its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not reflect the views of UNICEF/UNDP/World Bank/WHO Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases nor DfID nor the authors' institutions of affiliation.Authors' contributions DM, JT, JK, GP, PW, FB, BM, HC, GO and KK took part in designing the study, in tools development, in data analysis and in manuscript writing. DM, JK, FB, BM, GO and KK did field work. All authors approved the final manuscript.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.
World Health Organization: World Malaria Report. WHO PressGenevaWorld Health Organization: World Malaria Report 2008 WHO Press Geneva 2008.
Where and why are 10 million children dying every year?. R E Black, S S Morris, J Bryce, Lancet. 361Black RE, Morris SS, Bryce J: Where and why are 10 million children dying every year? Lancet 2003, 361:2226-2234.
World Health Organization: World Health Statistics Country Health System Fact Sheet Uganda. World Health Organization: World Health Statistics Country Health System Fact Sheet Uganda 2006 [http://www.afro.who.int/home/countries/ fact_sheets/uganda.pdf], (Accessed September 19, 2009).
Determinants of delay in care-seeking for febrile children in eastern Uganda. E Rutebemberwa, K Kallander, G Tomson, S Peterson, G Pariyo, Trop Med Int Health. 4Rutebemberwa E, Kallander K, Tomson G, Peterson S, Pariyo G: Determinants of delay in care-seeking for febrile children in eastern Uganda. Trop Med Int Health 2009, 4:1-8.
Achieving child survival goals: potential contribution of community health workers. A Haines, D Sanders, U Lehmann, A K Rowe, J E Lawn, Jan S Walker, D G Bhutta, Z , Lancet. 369Haines A, Sanders D, Lehmann U, Rowe AK, Lawn JE, Jan S, Walker DG, Bhutta Z: Achieving child survival goals: potential contribution of community health workers. Lancet 2007, 369:2121-2131.
A community-based program to provide prompt and adequate treatment of presumptive malaria in children. F Pagnoni, N Convelbo, J Tiendrebeogo, S Cousens, F Esposito, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 91Pagnoni F, Convelbo N, Tiendrebeogo J, Cousens S, Esposito F: A community-based program to provide prompt and adequate treatment of presumptive malaria in children. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1997, 91:512-517.
Teaching mothers to provide home treatment of malaria in Tigray, Ethiopia: a randomised trial. G Kidane, R H Morrow, Lancet. 356Kidane G, Morrow RH: Teaching mothers to provide home treatment of malaria in Tigray, Ethiopia: a randomised trial. Lancet 2000, 356:550-555.
Early treatment of childhood fevers with pre-packaged antimalarial drugs in the home reduces severe malaria morbidity in Burkina Faso. S B Sirima, A Konate, A B Tiono, N Convelbo, S Cousens, F Pagnoni, Trop Med Int Health. 8Sirima SB, Konate A, Tiono AB, Convelbo N, Cousens S, Pagnoni F: Early treatment of childhood fevers with pre-packaged antimalarial drugs in the home reduces severe malaria morbidity in Burkina Faso. Trop Med Int Health 2003, 8:133-139.
Implementation guidelines for the Home Based Management of fever strategy. MoH/UNICEF/BASICS/DISH. Ministry Of Health, Uganda, Kampala, UgandaMinistry of Health Uganda: Implementation guidelines for the Home Based Management of fever strategy. MoH/UNICEF/BASICS/DISH, Kampala, Uganda, 1 2002.
Effective Management of Childhood Malaria at the Community Level: Program Experience to Guide the Research Agenda. Paper for the WHO/TDR Scientific Working Group on Malaria. M W Young, Geneva, SwitzerlandYoung MW: Effective Management of Childhood Malaria at the Community Level: Program Experience to Guide the Research Agenda. Paper for the WHO/TDR Scientific Working Group on Malaria, Geneva, Switzerland, 2003, 24-27 March .
Home-based management of malaria in the era of urbanization. K Kallander, J Nsungwa-Sabiiti, Lancet. 373Kallander K, Nsungwa-Sabiiti J: Home-based management of malaria in the era of urbanization. Lancet 2009, 373:1582-1584.
Uganda: Home based management of fever strategy in Uganda: survey report WHO. Ministry, Health, BASICS. Ministry of Health, Uganda: Home based management of fever strategy in Uganda: survey report WHO, BASICS 2004.
. Mukanga, Malaria Journal. 9Mukanga et al. Malaria Journal 2010, 9:203 http://www.malariajournal.com/content
Attitude of women in western Uganda towards pre-packed, unit-dosed malaria treatment for children. Ahd Kilian, D Tindyebwa, T Gulck, T Byamukama, T Rubaale, G Kabagambe, R Korte, Trop Med Int Health. 8Kilian AHD, Tindyebwa D, Gulck T, Byamukama T, Rubaale T, Kabagambe G, Korte R: Attitude of women in western Uganda towards pre-packed, unit-dosed malaria treatment for children. Trop Med Int Health 2003, 8:431-438.
Editorial: Should Artemisininbased combination treatment be used in the home-based management of malaria. D&apos;alessandro U Talisuna, A Boelaert, M , Trop Med Int Health. 10D'alessandro U, Talisuna A, Boelaert M: Editorial: Should Artemisininbased combination treatment be used in the home-based management of malaria? Trop Med Int Health 2005, 10:1-2.
Home management of malaria with artemetherlumefantrine compared with standard care in urban Ugandan children: a randomized controlled trial. G S Staedke, N Mwebaza, R M Kamya, T D Clark, G Dorsey, P J Rosenthal, Cjm Whitty, Lancet. 373Staedke GS, Mwebaza N, Kamya RM, Clark TD, Dorsey G, Rosenthal PJ, Whitty CJM: Home management of malaria with artemether- lumefantrine compared with standard care in urban Ugandan children: a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2009, 373:1623-1631.
. K I Barnes, N D Durrheim, F Little, A Jackson, U Mehta, Allen E Dlamini, S S Tsoka, J Bredenkamp, B Mthembu, J D White, N J Sharp, B L , PLoS Med. 2330Barnes KI, Durrheim ND, Little F, Jackson A, Mehta U, Allen E, Dlamini SS, Tsoka J, Bredenkamp B, Mthembu JD, White NJ, Sharp BL: Effect of artemether-lumefantrine policy and improved vector control on malaria burden in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. PLoS Med 2005, 2:e330.
A steep decline of malaria morbidity and mortality trends in Eritrea between 2000 and 2004: the effect of combination of control methods. P M Nyarango, T Gebremeskel, G Mebrahtu, J Mufunda, U Abdulmumini, A Ogbamariam, A Kosia, A Gebremichael, D Gunawardena, Y Ghebrat, Y Okbaldet, Malar J. 533Nyarango PM, Gebremeskel T, Mebrahtu G, Mufunda J, Abdulmumini U, Ogbamariam A, Kosia A, Gebremichael A, Gunawardena D, Ghebrat Y, Okbaldet Y: A steep decline of malaria morbidity and mortality trends in Eritrea between 2000 and 2004: the effect of combination of control methods. Malar J 2006, 5:33.
Impact of artemisinin-based combination therapy and insecticide-treated nets on malaria burden in Zanzibar. A Bhattarai, A S Ali, P S Kachur, A Mårtensson, A K Abbas, R Khatib, A Almafazy, M Ramsan, G Rotllant, J F Gerstenmaier, F Molteni, S Abdulla, S M Montgomery, Kaneko, A Björkman, PLoS Med. 4309Bhattarai A, Ali AS, Kachur PS, Mårtensson A, Abbas AK, Khatib R, Al- mafazy A, Ramsan M, Rotllant G, Gerstenmaier JF, Molteni F, Abdulla S, Montgomery SM, Kaneko , Björkman A: Impact of artemisinin-based combination therapy and insecticide-treated nets on malaria burden in Zanzibar. PLoS Med 2007, 4:e309.
Initial evidence of reduction of malaria cases and deaths in Rwanda and Ethiopia due to rapid scale-up of malaria prevention and treatment. M Otten, M Aregawi, W Were, C Karema, A Medin, W Bekele, D Jima, K Gausi, R Komatsu, E Korenromp, D Low-Beer, M Grabowsky, Malar J. 814Otten M, Aregawi M, Were W, Karema C, Medin A, Bekele W, Jima D, Gausi K, Komatsu R, Korenromp E, Low-Beer D, Grabowsky M: Initial evidence of reduction of malaria cases and deaths in Rwanda and Ethiopia due to rapid scale-up of malaria prevention and treatment. Malar J 2009, 8:14.
. World Health Organization: . World Malaria Report. WHO PressWorld Health Organization: . World Malaria Report Geneva: WHO Press 2009.
Time To Move from Presumptive Malaria Treatment to Laboratory-Confirmed Diagnosis and Treatment in African Children with Fever. V D&apos;acremont, C Lengeler, H Mshinda, H Mshinda, D Mtasiwa, M Tanner, B Blaise Genton, PLoS Med. 6252D'Acremont V, Lengeler C, Mshinda H, Mshinda H, Mtasiwa D, Tanner M, Blaise Genton B: Time To Move from Presumptive Malaria Treatment to Laboratory-Confirmed Diagnosis and Treatment in African Children with Fever. PLoS Med 2009, 6:e252.
Overdiagnosis of malaria in patients with severe febrile illness in Tanzania: A prospective study. H Reyburn, R Mbatia, C Drakeley, I Carneiro, E Mwakasungula, O Mwerinde, K Saganda, J Shao, A Kitua, R Olomi, B M Greenwood, Cjm Whitty, BMJ. 3291212Reyburn H, Mbatia R, Drakeley C, Carneiro I, Mwakasungula E, Mwerinde O, Saganda K, Shao J, Kitua A, Olomi R, Greenwood BM, Whitty CJM: Overdiagnosis of malaria in patients with severe febrile illness in Tanzania: A prospective study. BMJ 2004, 329:1212.
President's Malaria Initiative Uganda: Malaria Operational Plan for. President's Malaria Initiative Uganda: Malaria Operational Plan for FY2010 2009.
Rapid Diagnostic Tests for Malaria Parasites. A Moody, Clin Microbiol Rev. 15Moody A: Rapid Diagnostic Tests for Malaria Parasites. Clin Microbiol Rev 2002, 15:66-78.
Rapid diagnostic testing for malaria. C K Murray, D Bell, R A Gasser, C Wongsrichanalai, Trop Med Int Health. 8Murray CK, Bell D, Gasser RA, Wongsrichanalai C: Rapid diagnostic testing for malaria. Trop Med Int Health 2003, 8:876-883.
Ensuring quality and access for malaria diagnosis: how can it be achieved?. D Bell, C Wongsrichanalai, J W Barnwell, Nat Rev Microbiol. 4Bell D, Wongsrichanalai C, Barnwell JW: Ensuring quality and access for malaria diagnosis: how can it be achieved? Nat Rev Microbiol 2006, 4:682-695.
Improving community health worker use of malaria rapid diagnostic tests in Zambia: package instructions, job aid and job aid-plus-training. A Harvey, L Jennings, M Chinyama, F Masaninga, K Mulholland, D Bell, Malar J. 7160Harvey A, Jennings L, Chinyama M, Masaninga F, Mulholland K, Bell D: Improving community health worker use of malaria rapid diagnostic tests in Zambia: package instructions, job aid and job aid-plus-training. Malar J 2008, 7:160.
Low validity of caretakers' reports on use of selected antimalarials and antibiotics in children with severe pneumonia at an urban hospital in Uganda. H Hildenwall, J Lindkvist, J K Tumwine, Y Bergqvist, G Pariyo, G Tomson, S Peterson, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 103Hildenwall H, Lindkvist J, Tumwine JK, Bergqvist Y, Pariyo G, Tomson G, Peterson S: Low validity of caretakers' reports on use of selected antimalarials and antibiotics in children with severe pneumonia at an urban hospital in Uganda. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2009, 103:95-101.
Out with the old, in with the new: the utility of rapid diagnostic tests for malaria diagnosis in Africa. C Drakeley, H Reyburn, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 103Drakeley C, Reyburn H: Out with the old, in with the new: the utility of rapid diagnostic tests for malaria diagnosis in Africa. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2009, 103:333-337.
Dispensary level pilot implementation of rapid diagnostic tests: an evaluation of RDT acceptance and usage by providers and patients -Tanzania. H A Williams, L Causer, E Metta, A Malila, T O&apos;reilly, Salim Abdulla, S Kachur, P S Bloland, P B , Malar J. 7239Williams HA, Causer L, Metta E, Malila A, O'Reilly T, Salim Abdulla S, Kachur PS, Bloland PB: Dispensary level pilot implementation of rapid diagnostic tests: an evaluation of RDT acceptance and usage by providers and patients -Tanzania. Malar J 2008, 7:239.
Where techno-science meets poverty: Medical research and the economy of blood in the Gambia. J Fairhead, M Leach, M Small, West Africa. Soc Sci Med. 63Fairhead J, Leach M, Small M: Where techno-science meets poverty: Medical research and the economy of blood in the Gambia, West Africa. Soc Sci Med 2006, 63:1109-1120.
Editorial: Popular concerns about medical research projects in sub-Saharan Africa -a critical voice in debates about medical research ethics. P W Geissler, R Pool, Trop Med Int Health. 11Geissler PW, Pool R: Editorial: Popular concerns about medical research projects in sub-Saharan Africa -a critical voice in debates about medical research ethics. Trop Med Int Health 2006, 11:975-982.
Drawing blood from young children: lessons learned from a trial in Ghana. S Newton, V Doku, W Geissler, K P Asante, S Cousens, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 103Newton S, Doku V, Geissler W, Asante KP, Cousens S: Drawing blood from young children: lessons learned from a trial in Ghana. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2009, 103:497-499.
Abandoning presumptive antimalarial treatment for febrile children aged less than five years-A case of running before we can walk. M English, H Reyburn, C Goodman, R W Snow, PLoS Med. 61000015English M, Reyburn H, Goodman C, Snow RW: Abandoning presumptive antimalarial treatment for febrile children aged less than five years-A case of running before we can walk? PLoS Med 2009, 6:e1000015.
Disseminating innovations in health care. D M Berwick, JAMA. 289Berwick DM: Disseminating innovations in health care. JAMA 2003, 289:1969-1975.
Netmark: Regional Africa program briefing book; Insecticide treated materials in Uganda. Netmark: Regional Africa program briefing book; Insecticide treated materials in Uganda 2000 [http://www.netmarkafrica.org/countries/uganda/briefbook/ uganda_briefing_book.pdf], (Accessed September 19, 2009).
Use of drugs, perceived drug efficacy and preferred providers for febrile children: implications for home management of fever. E Rutebemberwa, X Nsabagasani, G Pariyo, G Tomson, S Peterson, K Kallander, Malar J. 8131Rutebemberwa E, Nsabagasani X, Pariyo G, Tomson G, Peterson S, Kallander K: Use of drugs, perceived drug efficacy and preferred providers for febrile children: implications for home management of fever. Malar J 2009, 8:131.
Qualitative content analysis in nursing research: concepts, procedures and measures to achieve trustworthiness. H Graneheim, B Lundman, Nurse Educ Today. 24Graneheim H, Lundman B: Qualitative content analysis in nursing research: concepts, procedures and measures to achieve trustworthiness. Nurse Educ Today 2004, 24:105-112.
Feasibility and acceptability of artemisinin-based combination therapy for the home management of malaria in four African sites. I O Ajayi, E N Browne, B Garshong, F Bateganya, B Yusuf, P Agyei-Baffour, L Doamekpor, A Balyeku, K Munguti, S Counsens, M Nanyunja, F Pagnoni, Malar J. 76Ajayi IO, Browne EN, Garshong B, Bateganya F, Yusuf B, Agyei-Baffour P, Doamekpor L, Balyeku A, Munguti K, Counsens S, Nanyunja M, Pagnoni F: Feasibility and acceptability of artemisinin-based combination therapy for the home management of malaria in four African sites. Malar J 2008, 7:6.
Home based management of malaria in rural Uganda: Community perceptions and provider opinions. X Nsabagasani, J Nsungwa-Sabiiti, K Kallander, S Peterson, G Pariyo, G Tomson, Malar J. 611Nsabagasani X, Nsungwa-Sabiiti J, Kallander K, Peterson S, Pariyo G, Tomson G: Home based management of malaria in rural Uganda: Community perceptions and provider opinions. Malar J 2007, 6:11.
Implementation of Home based management of malaria in children reduces the work load for peripheral health facilities in a rural district of Burkina Faso. A Tiono, Y Kaboré, A Traoré, N Convelbo, F Pagnoni, S Sirima, Malar J. 7201Tiono A, Kaboré Y, Traoré A, Convelbo N, Pagnoni F, Sirima S: Implementation of Home based management of malaria in children reduces the work load for peripheral health facilities in a rural district of Burkina Faso. Malar J 2008, 7:201.
Feasibility and acceptability of the use of artemether-lumefantrine in the home management of uncomplicated malaria in children 6-59 months old in Ghana. M Chinbuah, O Gyapong, F Pagnoni, K Wellington, M Gyapong, Trop Med Int Health. 11Chinbuah M, Gyapong O, Pagnoni F, Wellington K, Gyapong M: Feasibility and acceptability of the use of artemether-lumefantrine in the home management of uncomplicated malaria in children 6-59 months old in Ghana. Trop Med Int Health 2006, 11:1003-1116.
Home management of malaria. F Pagnoni, Lancet. 374Pagnoni F: Home management of malaria. Lancet 2009, 374:288-289.
ACT now -with caution -for malaria treatments. V K Bhasin, L Nair, Lancet Infect Dis. 3609Bhasin VK, Nair L: ACT now -with caution -for malaria treatments. Lancet Infect Dis 2003, 3:609.
Uganda: Integrated community case management of childhood malaria, pneumonia and diarrhea Implementation Guide. Ministry, Health, Ministry of Health, Uganda: Integrated community case management of childhood malaria, pneumonia and diarrhea Implementation Guide 2010.
Feasibility and acceptability of home-based management of malaria strategy adapted to Sudan's conditions using artemisinin-based combination therapy and rapid diagnostic test. A Elmardi, M Malik, T Abdelgadir, S H Ali, A H Elsyed, M A Mudather, A H Elhassan, I Adam, Malar J. 839Elmardi A, Malik M, Abdelgadir T, Ali SH, Elsyed AH, Mudather MA, Elhassan AH, Adam I: Feasibility and acceptability of home-based management of malaria strategy adapted to Sudan's conditions using artemisinin-based combination therapy and rapid diagnostic test. Malar J 2009, 8:39.
Malaria Rapid Diagnostic Tests: One Size May Not Fit All. D Bell, A Moody, Clin Microbiol Rev. 15Bell D, Moody A: Malaria Rapid Diagnostic Tests: One Size May Not Fit All. Clin Microbiol Rev 2002, 15:771-772.
Is there a role for traditional medicine in basic health services in Africa? A plea for a community perspective. Vds Geest, Trop Med Int Health. 2Geest VDS: Is there a role for traditional medicine in basic health services in Africa? A plea for a community perspective. Trop Med Int Health 1997, 2:903-911.
Cultural constructions of efficacy. The context of medicines in developing countries Amsterdam: Het Spinhuis Publishersvan der Geest S. N L Etkin, Whyte SREtkin NL: Cultural constructions of efficacy. The context of medicines in developing countries Amsterdam: Het Spinhuis Publishersvan der Geest S, Whyte SR 1991.
Local terminology for medicines to treat fever in Bougouni District, Mali: implications for the introduction and evaluation of malaria treatment policies. A E Patterson, P Winch, K Gilroy, S Doumbia, Trop Med Int Health. 11Patterson AE, Winch P, Gilroy K, Doumbia S: Local terminology for medicines to treat fever in Bougouni District, Mali: implications for the introduction and evaluation of malaria treatment policies. Trop Med Int Health 2006, 11:1613-1624.
Ethnicity and social work practice. C Cox, P Ephross, Oxford University PressCox C, Ephross P: Ethnicity and social work practice Oxford University Press 1996.
Malaria rapid diagnostic tests: A revolution and challenge for management of febrile disease. L Dini, D Bell, CME. 26Dini L, Bell D: Malaria rapid diagnostic tests: A revolution and challenge for management of febrile disease. CME 2008, 26:297-298.
The paradox of home management of malaria with artemisinin combinations. D Charlwood, Trends Parasitol. 20Charlwood D: The paradox of home management of malaria with artemisinin combinations. Trends Parasitol 2004, 20:405-406.
The role of rapid diagnostic tests in managing malaria. Z Bisoffi, F Gobbi, A Angheben, J Van Den Ende, PLoS Med. 61000063Bisoffi Z, Gobbi F, Angheben A, Van den Ende J: The role of rapid diagnostic tests in managing malaria. PLoS Med 2009, 6:e1000063.
Predictors of the quality of health worker practices for uncomplicated malaria at government health facilities in Kenya. D Zurovac, A K Rowe, S A Ochola, A M Noor, B Midia, M English, R W Snow, Int J Epidemiol. 33Zurovac D, Rowe AK, Ochola SA, Noor AM, Midia B, English M, Snow RW: Predictors of the quality of health worker practices for uncomplicated malaria at government health facilities in Kenya. Int J Epidemiol 2004, 33:1080-1091.
. Mukanga, Malaria Journal. 9Mukanga et al. Malaria Journal 2010, 9:203 http://www.malariajournal.com/content
Triangulation revisited: strategy of validation or alternative. U Flick, Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour. 22Flick U: Triangulation revisited: strategy of validation or alternative? Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 1992, 22:175-197.
Qualitative research methods for social sciences Needham Heights: Allyn and Bacon. B L Berg, 10.1186/1475-2875-9-203Berg BL: Qualitative research methods for social sciences Needham Heights: Allyn and Bacon 2001. doi:10.1186/1475-2875-9-203
Community acceptability of use of rapid diagnostic tests for malaria by community health workers in Uganda. Mukanga, Malaria Journal. 9203Cite this article asCite this article as: Mukanga et al.: Community acceptability of use of rapid diagnostic tests for malaria by community health workers in Uganda. Malaria Journal 2010 9:203.


74007:Malaria in pregnancy : In search of tools for improved prevention


Background

Malaria affects over 300 million people every year, with around 90% of infections occurring in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) [1,2]. Community case management of malaria (CCMm), formerly known as home based management of malaria, is a strategy recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) which aims at reducing the malaria burden by improving early access to malaria directed healthcare [3]. It is based on treatment of malaria cases, mainly children, by community health workers (CHWs), within the community. Different cadres exist for CHWs, but all these individuals have in common that they are part of the community, they are not professional healthcare workers but receive a short training and often work on a voluntary basis or for small compensation (although in some countries they are included in the salaried healthcare system). While fever cases were previously treated presumptively with anti-malarials, CCMm programmes are now expected to follow the WHO recommendation to treat only malaria patients with confirmed diagnosis, usually with rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) [4]. It is expected that this will reduce unnecessary malaria treatment and increase correct diagnosis in patients suffering from other febrile illnesses. Three published reviews describe RDT use in CCMm, however, the issues discussed in these reviews are limited [5,6] and not all of the important literature was included [6], or CHWs were not distinguished from professional healthcare providers [7]. Systematically obtained information on the success or failure of critical steps in RDT-based CCMm is lacking, but is needed in order to show its value in malaria control programmes. Furthermore, the WHO currently advises to proceed to integrated community case management (iCCM) [8], which focuses on the diagnosis and treatment of multiple diseases such as malaria, pneumonia and diarrhoea, and lessons from CCMm should be used during this transition. This systematic review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the success or failure of critical steps in CCMm with rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs).

Methods


Search methodology

A systematic search was performed in the databases of Medline, Embase, the Cochrane Library and the library of the 'Malaria in Pregnancy' consortium (MIP consortium). Web of Science was used to search for missed relevant studies in references and citing articles. The databases were last searched on October 12, 2013. Synonyms for 'malaria' , 'RDT' and 'CHW' were combined to find all relevant studies. For the complete search syntax see Additional file 1.

Selection of studies

After removal of duplicates, title and abstract of articles were screened for in-and exclusion criteria by two independent readers (ER and PFM). A second screening was performed on full text articles. Discrepant results were resolved by discussion until a unanimous decision was reached. Criteria for inclusion were: original studies on RDT-based CCMm performed by CHWs defined as non-professional healthcare workers working within a community, studies on Plasmodium falciparum malaria, studies on one of the following critical steps: test performance by CHWs, execution of test, test interpretation, adherence to test results by CHWs, effect on morbidity and mortality, adherence to test results by patients, referral completion, social acceptance, community uptake, stock-outs, CHW incentives and motivation and cost-effectiveness. Exclusion criteria were: studies on iCMM in which the individual effect of RDT-based CCMm on the outcome cannot be identified and studies outside SSA. The focus on SSA was chosen because of the specific malaria epidemiology with a high burden of P. falciparum malaria and high morbidity and mortality rates [9]. Authors of relevant conference abstracts were contacted for more detailed results and information on methodology; in case of no additional information, no response, or if full study details did not meet in-or exclusion criteria, these abstracts were excluded.

Data extraction

Data were extracted from included studies by two independent readers (ER and PFM) and additionally for social-behavioural themes by SD and KPG. Critical appraisal was done in Review Manager [10] for intervention and diagnostic studies. Evers checklist was used for studies on cost-effectiveness according to Cochrane advice [11]. For all other studies, criteria are not well defined in literature, so criteria were defined per outcome. No studies were discarded based on qualitative assessment. If possible, separate data for CCMm from studies on integrated CCM (iCCM) were extracted.

Analysis

A forest plot was created of the RDT test characteristics by the use of Review Manager. No meta-analysis was performed due to heterogeneity of study characteristics and outcomes. The same heterogeneity accounts for adherence to test results. For the analysis of social-behavioural themes, NVivo Software for qualitative data analysis (QSR International Pty Ltd Cardigan, UK) was used.

Results


Search results

In total, 295 articles were found, of which 293 were by database searching and two via other sources. The latter articles were found after e-mail contact with authors of two abstracts [12,13]. Both referred to an article that could not be found in any of the databases [14,15]. After removal of duplications and after the screening steps on inclusion and exclusion criteria 27 articles remained for data extraction ( Figure 1). Exact reasons for exclusion of full text articles can be found in Additional file 2. One article [16] provided the same outcome information as another [17] (based on the same study) and is, therefore, not separately discussed.
In Additional file 3, an overview of the included studies is presented and for each of the critical steps the number of articles and relevant articles are indicated. Most of the articles were published between 2008 and 2013.

Risk of bias summary

Risk of bias was assessed for each study for every outcome (Figures 2,3,4,5,6,7,8 and 9). Nearly all studies on RDT performance showed low risks of bias. The same accounted for RDT execution, although Counihan et al. [18] sometimes used non-febrile volunteers instead of patients for RDT observations and Harvey et al. [19] showed baseline differences in the groups of CHWs. Adherence to test results showed little bias, although it was often unclear how studies collected data. One study on adherence showed a possible patient selection bias because a large group of malaria-suspected patients was not tested at all [20]. More variable quality was found in studies on interpretation, healthcare-seeking behaviour, stock-outs and cost-effectiveness. In all three cost-effectiveness studies, debatable assumptions were made: sensitivity and specificity used for calculations were derived from studies on professional healthcare workers instead of CHWs [21][22][23]. Furthermore, in two cost-effectiveness analyses adherence to test results was assumed to be 100% [21,22]. High risk of bias was seen for all studies concerning morbidity and mortality; none met the preferred intervention design of a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial (RCT). At the same time, blinding patients and CHWs is impossible for this type of intervention. It is therefore unfortunate that the one study that described a non-blinded cluster RCT used a subjective outcome measure (patients' reporting of clinical recovery), potentially introducing bias [24]. The other studies were either not randomized [25], or were single-armed, pre-and post-intervention studies [26,27]. It should be noted that studies that showed high risk of bias for a certain outcome did not necessarily show high risk of bias for their main objective.

RDT performance when used by CHWs

Sensitivity and specificity of RDTs when performed by CHWs was assessed in seven studies ( Figure 10 and Table 1). Studies differed in participants, malaria transmission and RDT type used. Sensitivities ranged between 83.2 and 97.9% if RDTs were compared with microscopy as reference standard. Ishengoma et al. found that the sensitivity was significantly higher for cases < five years of age and for fever cases [28]. Sensitivity decreased with decreasing malaria transmission over the years in this study [28], but this was not confirmed in Tiono et al. [14]. Ratsimbasoa et al. additionally calculated RDT sensitivity with PCR as reference standard (RS) and found a sensitivity of 61.8% [29].
The specificity of RDTs in the hands of CHWs was found to be more variable than the sensitivity, ranging from 39% in the study of Chinkhumba et al. [30] to 95.1% in the study of Lemma et al. [22]. In Chinkhumba et al. [30] patients who self-treated with anti-malarials (2-8% in previous two weeks) were not excluded and this was associated with a lower specificity. Mubi et al. [24] also showed low specificity, but it was mentioned that the microscopy slides were of poor quality, possibly impairing the detection of parasites in actual true positive samples. Slide quality was not mentioned in Tiono et al. [14], who found a low specificity, especially in the high transmission season (25.4%). The conditions for RDT storage were appropriate and the authors mainly related the results to persistent circulating antigens [14]. In Ishengoma et al. a higher specificity for children < five years of age was shown compared with older patients [28].

RDT interpretation

RDT interpretation was assessed by either direct assessment of RDTs (five studies) or by photographic assessment (two studies) (see Table 2). Correct interpretation was high for the direct assessment of RDTs; 96 to 100% of tests and 95.1 to 100% of CHWs, provided that CHWs were trained properly [18,19,21,32]. In photographic assessments, which have the inherent risk of selection bias as the number of ambiguous tests is relatively high, well-trained CHWs also scored high numbers of correctly interpreted tests, although more mistakes were made in reading faint positive and invalid tests [18,19]. The importance of training was shown for direct interpretation of RDTs as well as for photographic assessment in Harvey et al. [19]. In both assessments correct interpretation was lowest for CHWs who used only manufacturer's instructions, better for CHWs who used a job aid and the best for CHWs who used a job aid and received three hours' training. Unfortunately, a risk of selection bias was present because CHWs were not randomly selected and completion of secondary education was 6, 19 and 35%, respectively. Some indications were also found for the beneficial effect of repetitive execution of RDTs. In Harvey et al. improvement was seen with each successive RDT, although these data were not  presented [19]. Improvement over time was also presented by Counihan et al. [18]; the percentage of CHWs correctly interpreting RDT results from patients or volunteers at three, six and 12 months after training was 95.1, 98.3 and 98.3%, respectively. In contrast, this was not the case with the ten-item photographic assessment in which four CHWs consistently showed poor interpretation.

Execution of RDTs

Execution of RDTs was investigated in five studies that used non-uniform outcome variables (see Table 2). The way CHWs executed RDTs was judged on several items, but differences in number and definition of items further impaired comparison [18][19][20][21]32]. Nevertheless CHWs were found to correctly conduct RDTs if properly trained; 90 to 100% of steps were successfully executed in two studies that used the same WHO checklist, Hawkes et al. [21] and Harvey et al. [19]. In contrast, untrained CHWs that used only manufacturer's instructions or a job aid were found to respectively conduct only 57 and 80% of steps correctly in Harvey et al. [19]. The assessment of each individual executed step in this study showed that problems were found in dispensing buffer drops, waiting correct amount of time, pricking side of finger, blood collection and recording result in register. Counihan et al. [18], who assessed only the execution of eight RDT steps (see Additional file 4) that were considered critical for diagnosis or safety, showed improvement over time: 40.3, 61.7 and 79.7% of CHWs correctly performed critical steps at three, six and 12 months, respectively. Problematic steps were writing patient's name on cassette, recording results in register, usage of the blood collection loop, reading the test result in the right time and disposing non-sharps in non-sharps container [18][19][20]. Why these steps were problematic was not studied. No specific studies were done that looked at safety issues while performing RDTs but some included particular findings. Ndiaye et al. [20] observed that 0% of CHWs used gloves, but this was partly due to stock problems. In contrast, high levels of glove use were reported in Counihan et al. [18] (100% of CHWs after 12 months) and Harvey et al. [19] (96% in the group of trained CHWs). In Counihan et al. [18] an observer had to intervene once because a CHW was about to re-use a lancet on a new patient.

Adherence to test results and referral guidelines by CHWs

In general almost all patients (>90.0%) with positive RDTs were provided with anti-malarial drugs by CHWs ( Table 3). The percentage of patients with negative RDTs who, contradictory to the guidelines, still received antimalarial treatment was more variable, ranging from 0.2 to 58%. Six studies showed levels <10%, including all  iCCM studies, while two studies showed outliers of 20.3% [20] and 58% [30] of negative-tested patients that were treated. One other study presented the percentage of CHWs adhering to test results and showed that 30% of them treated negative-tested patients based on clinical judgment rather than RDT result; this was not related to previous experience in malaria management or educational background [27]. Ndiaye et al. [20] showed that the adherence was related to the type of care providers in their study. Community medicine distributors (CMDs) were only trained on RDT-based malaria management, while CHWs were attributed more health intervention tasks. CHWs gave artemisinin-combination therapy (ACT) to 24.8% of RDT negatives, while CMDs gave ACT to 10.4% of RDT negatives. Besides treating a high number of negative patients, CHWs also treated 22.3% of patients with ACT who were not tested at all, while for CMDs this was only 0.8%. Furthermore, CHWs and CMDs did not comply with the referral policy; referral rates from patient groups that should have been referred ranged from 18.2 to 47.1% with the lowest referral rates found for babies < two months of age and patients with severe symptoms. The only other study reporting on referral by CHWs showed better results, in the first year, 79.5% of RDT negatives were referred according to protocol and in the second year this had increased to 97.4% [25]. No explanations were given in the studies on reasons for nonadherence regarding treatment of negatives and referral.

Morbidity and mortality

Four trials assessed outcomes related to morbidity, mortality or both (Table 4), but all showed low quality evidence ( Figure 7) impairing firm conclusions. One study reported lower slide positivity rates during the RDT-based CCMm intervention period in comparison with presumptive CCMm in the pre-intervention period. However, besides changing to RDT-based diagnosis, the type of antimalarial drug used changed from sulphadoxinepyrimethamine to an ACT in this study [26]. Two other  studies showed beneficial effects of RDT-based CCMm but only compared it to areas with no CCMm [25,27]. In contrast, the perception of patients on morbidity did not improve with RDT-based CMMm. In a randomized, cross-over trial on RDT-based CCMm versus presumptive CCMm, a significant increased perception of disease recovery was found in the presumptively treated patients at day 7 compared with the intervention arm (97.3 versus 93.3%, p = 0.000). More patients were treated with antimalarials in the control group; however, in both the intervention and control group the perceived unrecovered patients harboured only few malaria positives (repeated testing at day 7), thus suggesting a possible bias in the subjective study outcome [24].

Community acceptance

Studies by Mukanga et al. [35] in Uganda and Nsagha et al. [36] in Cameroon assessed the opinion of community members before introducing an RDT-based CCMm intervention. In Mukanga et al. [35] presumptive CCMm was already implemented and a positive attitude towards the CHWs was present, due to their voluntary services, accessibility and the effectiveness of provided drugs. The change to CHWs using RDTs was therefore well received. In Nsagha et al. [36] all participants would welcome RDTs, but in this urban setting, where other healthcare providers are available, CHWs were not always considered to be the appropriate persons to carry out RDTs. Participants in both studies stressed that proper training of CHWs on RDT use was considered essential.
A few years later Mukanga et al. [37] asked community members in Uganda for their opinion after introduction of RDT-based CCMm; 79.4% thought CHWs' service was better after introduction of RDTs and 88.7% thought CHWs should continue to use RDTs. Support for a high acceptance was also found in Senegal, where community members mainly praised the increased access to malaria care [38]. Furthermore, in several studies participants welcomed RDTs since it made correct diagnosis possible at the village level, which saved money on transport [27,36,38].
Acceptability of diagnosis and treatment by CHWs was related to the outcome of the RDT. Only 5% of CHWs had problems persuading RDT-positive patients of a malaria diagnosis in Sudan [27]. This is supported by Mubi et al. [24], in which 97.4% of patients complied to prescribed treatment after a positive RDT. However, persuading patients that they did not have malaria was problematic for 20% of CHWs in case of negative test results [27], an issue that was already predicted by Mukanga et al. [35].
Adherence to referral advice by patients was reported in only two studies [33,39]. Chanda et al. [33] used a system in which CHWs were notified by health centre staff if a referred patient visited the health centre. For 40 to 42% of the referrals feedback was received. In contrast, Thomson et al. [39] found a very low referral completion of 1.5%. They surveyed children three to 59 months and pregnant women in their second and third trimester in Sierra Leone. A large variation in referral completion was found within the different communities (0 to 18.8%). Furthermore, if stratified for RDT results, referral completion was 88.2% for RDT positives (usually referred for signs of severe malaria) in contrast to 0.9% for RDT negatives. Barriers for adherence    mentioned in focus group discussions were bad roads [38], difficulties in transport [38], distance to health centre [33,38] and lack of staff at the health centre which may result in long waiting hours [33].

Uptake of RDT based CCMm by members of the community

Three studies reported on the uptake by the community of RDT-based CCMm in comparison to baseline levels (pre-intervention period), presumptive CCMm or health centre-based care (Table 5). Two studies showed an increased use of RDT-based CCMm services over the study period [15,27]. Additionally, one of the studies compared it to health centre-based care and showed a constant number of visits in these clinics. It was concluded that the overall access to malaria healthcare had thus increased by the intervention [15]. These positive findings are not always supported, as in a study of Lemma et al. [40], the number of people visiting the randomly selected CHWs who performed RDT-based CCMm was half of those visiting CHWs who used presumptive diagnosis. The reasons for this reduction were not further investigated. Obstacles for visiting the CHW mentioned by the community in three other studies were the unavailability of the CHW [16,37], dislike of CHW services [37], distrust of the skills of the CHWs [37], lack of drugs [37], fear of HIV/AIDs infection [35], a Hawkes [21] One day training. Pictorial job aid was provided.
100% of CHWs correctly interpreted the RDT directly after training.
Median score on a WHO 16-item assessment of RDT performance was 100% (range of 94-100%) directly after training.
Ndiaye [20] CHWs: one month theoretical training, one month practical training at health post. CMDs: 3-day theoretical training, 15 days practical training at health post.
-% CHWs and CMDs correctly performing the step, observed over two years.
(1) Surface clean and flat -87%
(2) Test opened just before use -100%
(3) Document patient name and date -83%
(4) Use of gloves -0%  99.0% 99.9% 7.6% * = correct treatment, ** = percentage of CHWs that relied on RDT results, *** = adherence percentages calculated from study data, **** = CHWs attended review meetings with study team each month discussing non-adherence to diagnostic and treatment algorithm with CHWs, HF = health facility, NS = not specified, AL = artemetherlumefantrine, SP = sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine, AS = artesunate, ACT = artemisinin-based combination therapy (not further specified), BF = Burkina Faso, Gh = Ghana, Ug = Uganda. Rutta [26] Pre-post study RDT-based CCMm (with AL)
Comparison with pre-intervention period (presumptive CCMm with SP)
A drop of >72.0% in malaria slide positivity rate to a persistent low level of <10% was observed in the study period.
Elmardi [27] Pre-post study RDT-based CCMm (with AS/SP).
Comparison with pre-intervention period (no CCMm, health centres treated with AS/SP) 24% fever cases in last two weeks pre-intervention and 8.5% fever cases post intervention (p = 0.000).
61 deaths (all <5 years) in the last season pre-implementation of intervention versus 1 death (>5 years) in the season post-implementation (p = 0.000).
disease that is perceived to be too severe for CHW to handle [16], and the relative distance to the health centre versus to the CHW [16,37].

Stock-outs

In the pre-intervention focus group discussions in the study of Mukanga et al. [35], problems in lack of transport for replenishment of supplies were foreseen. Four studies mentioned stock-out problems [18,20,33,38].
The only other study that mentioned supply issues did not experience any stock-out problems [27]. In all studies the CHW was instructed to replenish stocks at an affiliated health centre. Blanas et al. [38] found in 2009 that 74% of villages did not have RDTs or the RDTs were expired. In 68% of villages no ACT was available. However, Ndiaye et al. [20] found in the same study area in 2010 and 2011, that 90.2% of CHWs had RDTs in stock and 88% had sufficient ACT in stock. It seems that experience over time helped stock management, although in the latter study only 11.8% of all stock management forms were completed. Stock-out problems were also found in the studies of Chanda et al. [33] (stock-outs of RDTs for about two weeks) and Counihan et al. [18] (stock-outs of drugs and RDTs). One of the biggest problems for CHWs in the latter study was the refusal of health centres to resupply the CHWs. Health centres were either not informed about the agreement on stock supply or they experienced stock-outs themselves [18].

Motivation and remuneration of CHWs

Ndiaye et al. [20] showed that there was high seasonal variation in CHW participation in Senegal. This could be due to the difference in malaria burden but the authors also suspect that the little remuneration and the nearby gold mining activities had their impact on CHW participation. CHWs are mostly considered volunteers, but incentives such as small fees for their consultation [27], compensation in material form or services [16,17,23,29], or structured payments [17,24,26,30] were mentioned in most studies. In Elmardi et al. [27] only 35% of CHWs were satisfied with the financial outcome of their services which was 0.5 US$ per consultation. However, when these CHWs were asked about the most motivating aspect of their work, it was not the financial compensation but community respect and spiritual outcome. This was supported by Hamer et al. [17] in which only four of 18 CHWs received some kind of payment, but almost all were satisfied or highly satisfied with their CHW job (37 and 61%, respectively). There was no information on the impact of incentives and motivation on the attrition of CHWs.

Cost-effectiveness

Two studies on cost-effectiveness compared RDT-based CCMm to presumptive CCMm [21,22] and a third compared it with health centre-based malaria care [23] ( Table 6). All three studies did not have sufficient quality for cost-effectiveness analyses as described in risk of bias summary and all used a short-term outcome for health benefit, that is cost per correctly treated case [22,23], or related cost per case saved from unnecessary treatment [21]. Compared to health centre-based care, costs for RDTbased CCMm were lower per correctly treated case, but the additional cost per change in case appropriately diagnosed and treated was 4.18 US$ for RDT-based CCMm in Zambia [23]. RDT-based CCMm was also found to cost less compared with presumptive CCMm for areas with low to medium malaria transmission [22], but not in high transmission areas as was shown in the Democratic Republic of Congo [21]. Furthermore, study region could be of importance as shown by Lemma et al. [22] in Ethiopia. The study was situated in an area where Plasmodium vivax is also prevalent and consequently the RDT that differentiated between types of malaria species showed the lowest costs per appropriately treated case. However, for total costs, only differentiating between P. falciparum malaria and all other fever cases was the cheapest option.

Discussion

This review showed that CHWs are able to provide qualitative health care for malaria if properly trained. This is substantiated by other reviews for shared outcomes [5][6][7]. Nevertheless some barriers are present for the success of the intervention. The success and failure of each of the steps in CCMm is discussed below. Tayler-Smith [15] RDT-based CCMm free of charge Health centre care, little payment was required for ACT.
In two years there was an increase in number of episodes of treated malaria per child per year from 0.4 to 1.2 for CHWs, whereas it remained stable at 0.2 for health centres.
The high quality of care is reflected in the good sensitivity and specificity of RDTs used by CHWs compared with microscopy. A high sensitivity is needed because, as the new first line of health care, RDT-based CCMm cannot be inferior in detecting malaria cases to the existing practices in health centres in which microscopy is often used, especially because it seems that RDT negatives, including false negatives, may not always reach a health centre for additional care [33,39]. When the RDTs performed by CHWs were compared to PCR the sensitivity lowered but many of these cases were also missed by microscopy [29]. Furthermore, the clinical relevance of these low parasitaemia cases is being debated, because they are considered to be ubiquitous and usually asymptomatic, although it might cause anaemia [41]. Recent indications of a decreased malaria transmission in regions in SSA could however lead to lower levels of immunity in the population and might subsequently increase disease susceptibility, also for subjects with low parasitaemia levels [42]. RDT performance in case of low parasitaemia levels will therefore become increasingly important, especially in elimination settings.
Specificity levels were more variable, which is also seen in RDT use by professional health-care workers [43]. This is a potential threat to the success of CCMm as it could lead to overtreatment and missed diagnoses of other febrile illnesses. This could be a reason to promote the implementation of iCCM, as other serious causes of fever, such as pneumonia, will be detected with this intervention. Factors influencing specificity could be microscopy slide quality [24] and persistent circulating HRP2 antigens (the diagnostic target of P. falciparum RDTs) after clearance of the malaria infection [44]. The latter might explain a lower specificity when a substantial part of individuals received previous anti-malarial treatment [30] and the lower specificity for individuals with a higher immunity against malaria, such as children > five years of age in Ishengoma et al. [28] and in Chinkhumba et al. [30]. Another possibility for a low specificity, though controversial, could be that RDTs are more sensitive than microscopy, meaning that false positives were actually true positives [43]. Support for this conclusion may be found in Ratsimbasoa et al. who showed a higher specificity if RDTs were compared with PCR than if RDTs were compared with microscopy [29].
The performance of RDTs did not seem to be much influenced by execution and interpretation of RDTs, as these showed generally good results. It should however be considered that all results were collected by (in)direct evaluation of the CHWs and this may have biased the outcome [45]. Job aid and training were factors positively associated with interpretation and execution of RDTs, however, this improvement could also be related to the selection bias in CHWs. That would imply CHWs perform better with higher educational background. Nevertheless progress may still be obtained by increased practice of RDTs during training [18,19], especially practice of interpretation of faint positives and invalid test results and practice of the steps that were found to be frequently problematic; these were collecting blood in the right way and in the right amount, dispensing buffer drops in the right amount and in the right well, registering patient data and waiting the correct time before reading test results [18][19][20]. It is unknown why these steps were more problematic. Only one study reported an event with high safety risk [18], but safety issues should always be well addressed during training. Furthermore, visual impairments may hamper the correct interpretation of RDTs [34] and therefore screening for visual impairments should be done before appointing new CHWs.
RDT performance could also have been influenced by 1) storage conditions [46], which stresses the need of a cold chain, or 2) type of RDT, because of variable intrinsic diagnostic qualities and differences in ease of execution and interpretation. Many types of RDTs are available and not enough evidence was found in this review to advise on a specific type of test. Guidance for RDT choice can be found in a published WHO report which shows an extended overview of all different malaria RDTs, although it should be noted that these were tested in regulated circumstances by laboratory technicians, thus not informing on end-user impact [47]. Adherence to test results and referral guidelines is important for safe and successful implementation of RDTbased CCMm and the reviewed literature highlighted that CHWs showed generally high levels of adherence to test results regarding treatment. This in contrast to professional healthcare workers, in whom adherence was found to be much more variable because they often rely on clinical judgment instead of RDT results [48][49][50][51][52] and the fear of false-negative RDT results may tempt them to treat negative patients, especially in the case of subjects with no or little malaria immunity [53]. It could be that these reasons also contributed to the few studies on CHWs who reported non-adherence to negative test results [20,27,30], especially because CHWs were previously instructed to regard any fever case as malaria. This is however unknown since CHW reasons for not adhering to negative test results were not investigated, although several studies stressed the importance of training and monitoring in order for CHWs to adhere to the study guidelines [17,18,23,24,26,28,30,32,33,40]. Interestingly, all studies with an iCCM design showed good adherence to negative RDT results. The provided alternatives for malaria treatment in iCCM, such as antibiotic treatment for pneumonia after diagnosis with a respiratory rate timer, could have contributed positively to this adherence.
Unfortunately, despite the importance of referring patients with danger signs, adherence to referral policy is scarcely addressed, with one study reporting low [20] and one reporting high adherence [25]. Again, why CHWs did not refer patients was not studied. From the patient perspective, two studies investigated referral completion and showed that many patients did not follow up on referral, although the big difference in magnitude between these studies is remarkable [33,39]. Possible barriers for patients to complete referral were found to be mostly due to transportation difficulties; a problem that is even bigger for health centre-based care and one that is not easily solved, although iCCM could reduce the overall need for referral. Other barriers were not thoroughly investigated; however an interesting finding was that RDT result apparently influenced referral completion [39].
Studies on morbidity and mortality lacked high quality evidence which impairs firm conclusions. CCMm should be beneficial compared with presumptive CCMm by decreasing overtreatment, and increasing diagnoses of other diseases. However, false negative RDT results could negate the beneficial effects. The low evidence is surprising, but may reflect the more challenging design needed, which should incorporate follow-up of all patients.
The effect on morbidity and mortality in the total population is dependent on acceptability and healthcareseeking behaviour of the community, which was found to increase within the community after introduction of RDT-based CCMm. It should, however, be noted that the studies reporting on the uptake of CCMm with RDTs took place during a trial, which could influence the way people behave. This effect is better known as the Hawthorne effect [45]. Several aspects were mentioned as barriers of CCMm uptake in the reviewed studies. Even though CHWs are mostly selected by the community or community leaders and must often meet certain criteria of educational background, barriers related to distrust of the CHW are mentioned [37]. How often distrust is a problem and what this is based upon is unknown. Better understanding of distrust might help in correctly sensitizing the community to increase acceptance and uptake of CCMm. Other barriers are logistical factors such as distance and transport to CHW, unavailability of CHW and stock outs. As CCMm already brings malaria care closer to the patient's home, problems of distance and transport are not specific for community based healthcare and are difficult to solve. Unavailability of the CHW might be related to too little remuneration, limiting CHWs in their time because they must take care of their livelihood. CHW remuneration is shortly discussed below. The issue of stock-outs seems to be a frequent problem for RDTs and anti-malarial drugs [18,20,33,38]. Next to the failure to provide patients the care they need at these moments, even the rumour of stock-out could prevent people from visiting CHWs [37]. The problem might be even bigger after trial termination because stock supply is usually more strictly regulated during study periods. Experience with stock management by CHWs may have a positive influence on the availability [20], but stock management by CHWs is not always the main barrier [33]. CHWs usually rely on nearby health facilities for their stock supply but, due to financial, logistical, political, and other factors, drug supply through the government health systems is often unreliable and shortages of essential drugs are common in health centres as well, especially in the most remote areas [54].
Another issue important for sustainability of RDT-based CCMm is CHWs' motivation and remuneration. It is unfortunate that information is scarce and there is no evaluation of motivation and the remuneration alternatives on the subsequent retention of CHWs in RDTbased CCMm. However, respect by the community and spiritual outcomes seem to be important for motivation. This was also reported in a recent Cochrane review that informed on motivation for lay health workers involved in all types of healthcare interventions [55]. Altruism, social recognition, knowledge gain, and career development were mentioned as motivations. Discrepancies were found in opinions on payment as incentive; supporters thought their time investment and obtained skills should be compensated, opponents thought working in a profitoriented way can evoke negative reactions within the community [56]. Non-monetary incentives, such as bicycles, uniforms, mobile phones, or health insurance were generally well appreciated [56,57].
The last important item for long-term implementation, in particular for policy makers, is cost-effectiveness. Costeffectiveness is highly dependent on malaria transmission, infrastructure and existing health systems. It can be concluded from the reviewed literature that the possible monetary beneficial effects of RDT-based CCMm versus presumptive CCMm are the biggest in areas with low to moderate malaria prevalence, at least for the costs per correctly treated case. With declining malaria prevalence in many SSA countries, RDT-based CCMm will probably become increasingly cost-effective [58]. However, because of limitations in the study designs these cost-effectiveness analyses are not informative enough for policy makers. Most importantly not all health-related benefits were included, such as the effect on longer term morbidity and mortality. Also, the real-time information on malaria prevalence that can be obtained with RDT testing is of importance for malaria control programmes. Moreover, testing with RDTs enables CHWs to adequately treat other febrile diseases than malaria and is the first step in moving from CCMm to iCCM. Because of these additional benefits, cost-utility analyses on differences in disability or quality adjusted life years (DALYs or QALYs) would gain the most information on the actual effects for patients and the possible impact for society of RDT-based CCMm.
A number of limitations are present due to the scope of this review. First of all, for several outcomes only a few studies were found, limiting the amount of evidence. Moreover, the few studies found were sometimes of insufficient quality for the relevant outcome, such as for morbidity and mortality. In general, very few studies investigated the factors that could explain why some of the critical steps in CCMm are successful or not. Secondly, in contrast to outcomes of diagnostic quality, cost-effectiveness, or impact of intervention on morbidity or mortality, it was challenging to assess the risk of bias for the remaining outcomes, because criteria for quality assessment were not standardized. Thirdly, most outcomes were investigated in trial settings, in which logistics are frequently well arranged and motivation is high, but only until the end of the study period. The lack of implementation studies may therefore have caused a bias. Finally, the restriction of the review to CCMm prevented the use of studies on iCCM without distinguishable CCMm data, but this was the only way to establish the benefits and failures of the individual intervention for the fight against malaria. Nevertheless, integrated CCM is an important development that may lead to increased access to targeted healthcare, without jeopardizing but potentially even improving malaria care.
Although the data presented in this review give a wealth of information, several aspects warrant further studies. First of all, no firm conclusions can be made on the absolute impact of the test and treat policies on morbidity and mortality. Further studies appropriately designed to measure this effect are needed and should preferably include follow-up of all patients, including referred and RDTnegative patients to also estimate the change in detection of other febrile diseases. Proven effect on morbidity and mortality will help policy makers in their decision about implementation of the intervention. Furthermore, this review has shown that social science contributions are scarce. This limits the understanding of the implementation of RDT-based CCMm in different local contexts. Multidisciplinary approaches in which biomedical and social sciences asses the intervention, both by qualitative and quantitative methods, are needed. Factors influencing adherence to test results, referral completion, acceptance and uptake of the intervention and CHW attrition need to be more thoroughly investigated. Moreover, research is required to assess the best and most sustainable way of (re)training and supervising CHWs.
Little is published on logistic and structural elements, which would allow the design of a sustainable programme. Therefore, the system of stock supply and stock management throughout the healthcare system should be outlined and analysed to detect the problem areas.

Conclusions

Despite limitations of the currently available evidence, several recommendations can be made for the design and implementation of CCMm. It is most important that CHWs receive a training in which they have enough opportunity to practice the difficult steps and interpretation of RDTs to ensure adequate execution and interpretation of the tests and consequently ensure the most optimal test performance. Furthermore, the risks derived from potentially lower specificity may be outweighed if iCCM is implemented. A job aid, repeated training and supervision can subsequently enhance the overall performance of CHWs, including adherence to test results. Again, further improvement in adherence can be obtained by implementing iCCM. Community sensitization is needed to ensure comprehension of the intervention and trust in the skills of the CHW. Furthermore, it might stimulate adherence to treatment and referral advice. The stock management system needs to be elucidated and stock management training should be an integrated part in the CHW and health centre staff training.
Malaria affects over 300 million people every year, with around 90% of infections occurring in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) [1,2]. Community case management of malaria (CCMm), formerly known as home based management of malaria, is a strategy recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) which aims at reducing the malaria burden by improving early access to malaria directed healthcare [3]. It is based on treatment of malaria cases, mainly children, by community health workers (CHWs), within the community. Different cadres exist for CHWs, but all these individuals have in common that they are part of the community, they are not professional healthcare workers but receive a short training and often work on a voluntary basis or for small compensation (although in some countries they are included in the salaried healthcare system). While fever cases were previously treated presumptively with anti-malarials, CCMm programmes are now expected to follow the WHO recommendation to treat only malaria patients with confirmed diagnosis, usually with rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) [4]. It is expected that this will reduce unnecessary malaria treatment and increase correct diagnosis in patients suffering from other febrile illnesses. Three published reviews describe RDT use in CCMm, however, the issues discussed in these reviews are limited [5,6] and not all of the important literature was included [6], or CHWs were not distinguished from professional healthcare providers [7]. Systematically obtained information on the success or failure of critical steps in RDT-based CCMm is lacking, but is needed in order to show its value in malaria control programmes. Furthermore, the WHO currently advises to proceed to integrated community case management (iCCM) [8], which focuses on the diagnosis and treatment of multiple diseases such as malaria, pneumonia and diarrhoea, and lessons from CCMm should be used during this transition. This systematic review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the success or failure of critical steps in CCMm with rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs).
A systematic search was performed in the databases of Medline, Embase, the Cochrane Library and the library of the 'Malaria in Pregnancy' consortium (MIP consortium). Web of Science was used to search for missed relevant studies in references and citing articles. The databases were last searched on October 12, 2013. Synonyms for 'malaria' , 'RDT' and 'CHW' were combined to find all relevant studies. For the complete search syntax see Additional file 1.
After removal of duplicates, title and abstract of articles were screened for in-and exclusion criteria by two independent readers (ER and PFM). A second screening was performed on full text articles. Discrepant results were resolved by discussion until a unanimous decision was reached. Criteria for inclusion were: original studies on RDT-based CCMm performed by CHWs defined as non-professional healthcare workers working within a community, studies on Plasmodium falciparum malaria, studies on one of the following critical steps: test performance by CHWs, execution of test, test interpretation, adherence to test results by CHWs, effect on morbidity and mortality, adherence to test results by patients, referral completion, social acceptance, community uptake, stock-outs, CHW incentives and motivation and cost-effectiveness. Exclusion criteria were: studies on iCMM in which the individual effect of RDT-based CCMm on the outcome cannot be identified and studies outside SSA. The focus on SSA was chosen because of the specific malaria epidemiology with a high burden of P. falciparum malaria and high morbidity and mortality rates [9]. Authors of relevant conference abstracts were contacted for more detailed results and information on methodology; in case of no additional information, no response, or if full study details did not meet in-or exclusion criteria, these abstracts were excluded.
Data were extracted from included studies by two independent readers (ER and PFM) and additionally for social-behavioural themes by SD and KPG. Critical appraisal was done in Review Manager [10] for intervention and diagnostic studies. Evers checklist was used for studies on cost-effectiveness according to Cochrane advice [11]. For all other studies, criteria are not well defined in literature, so criteria were defined per outcome. No studies were discarded based on qualitative assessment. If possible, separate data for CCMm from studies on integrated CCM (iCCM) were extracted.
A forest plot was created of the RDT test characteristics by the use of Review Manager. No meta-analysis was performed due to heterogeneity of study characteristics and outcomes. The same heterogeneity accounts for adherence to test results. For the analysis of social-behavioural themes, NVivo Software for qualitative data analysis (QSR International Pty Ltd Cardigan, UK) was used.
In total, 295 articles were found, of which 293 were by database searching and two via other sources. The latter articles were found after e-mail contact with authors of two abstracts [12,13]. Both referred to an article that could not be found in any of the databases [14,15]. After removal of duplications and after the screening steps on inclusion and exclusion criteria 27 articles remained for data extraction ( Figure 1). Exact reasons for exclusion of full text articles can be found in Additional file 2. One article [16] provided the same outcome information as another [17] (based on the same study) and is, therefore, not separately discussed.
In Additional file 3, an overview of the included studies is presented and for each of the critical steps the number of articles and relevant articles are indicated. Most of the articles were published between 2008 and 2013.
Risk of bias was assessed for each study for every outcome (Figures 2,3,4,5,6,7,8 and 9). Nearly all studies on RDT performance showed low risks of bias. The same accounted for RDT execution, although Counihan et al. [18] sometimes used non-febrile volunteers instead of patients for RDT observations and Harvey et al. [19] showed baseline differences in the groups of CHWs. Adherence to test results showed little bias, although it was often unclear how studies collected data. One study on adherence showed a possible patient selection bias because a large group of malaria-suspected patients was not tested at all [20]. More variable quality was found in studies on interpretation, healthcare-seeking behaviour, stock-outs and cost-effectiveness. In all three cost-effectiveness studies, debatable assumptions were made: sensitivity and specificity used for calculations were derived from studies on professional healthcare workers instead of CHWs [21][22][23]. Furthermore, in two cost-effectiveness analyses adherence to test results was assumed to be 100% [21,22]. High risk of bias was seen for all studies concerning morbidity and mortality; none met the preferred intervention design of a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial (RCT). At the same time, blinding patients and CHWs is impossible for this type of intervention. It is therefore unfortunate that the one study that described a non-blinded cluster RCT used a subjective outcome measure (patients' reporting of clinical recovery), potentially introducing bias [24]. The other studies were either not randomized [25], or were single-armed, pre-and post-intervention studies [26,27]. It should be noted that studies that showed high risk of bias for a certain outcome did not necessarily show high risk of bias for their main objective.
Sensitivity and specificity of RDTs when performed by CHWs was assessed in seven studies ( Figure 10 and Table 1). Studies differed in participants, malaria transmission and RDT type used. Sensitivities ranged between 83.2 and 97.9% if RDTs were compared with microscopy as reference standard. Ishengoma et al. found that the sensitivity was significantly higher for cases < five years of age and for fever cases [28]. Sensitivity decreased with decreasing malaria transmission over the years in this study [28], but this was not confirmed in Tiono et al. [14]. Ratsimbasoa et al. additionally calculated RDT sensitivity with PCR as reference standard (RS) and found a sensitivity of 61.8% [29].
The specificity of RDTs in the hands of CHWs was found to be more variable than the sensitivity, ranging from 39% in the study of Chinkhumba et al. [30] to 95.1% in the study of Lemma et al. [22]. In Chinkhumba et al. [30] patients who self-treated with anti-malarials (2-8% in previous two weeks) were not excluded and this was associated with a lower specificity. Mubi et al. [24] also showed low specificity, but it was mentioned that the microscopy slides were of poor quality, possibly impairing the detection of parasites in actual true positive samples. Slide quality was not mentioned in Tiono et al. [14], who found a low specificity, especially in the high transmission season (25.4%). The conditions for RDT storage were appropriate and the authors mainly related the results to persistent circulating antigens [14]. In Ishengoma et al. a higher specificity for children < five years of age was shown compared with older patients [28].
RDT interpretation was assessed by either direct assessment of RDTs (five studies) or by photographic assessment (two studies) (see Table 2). Correct interpretation was high for the direct assessment of RDTs; 96 to 100% of tests and 95.1 to 100% of CHWs, provided that CHWs were trained properly [18,19,21,32]. In photographic assessments, which have the inherent risk of selection bias as the number of ambiguous tests is relatively high, well-trained CHWs also scored high numbers of correctly interpreted tests, although more mistakes were made in reading faint positive and invalid tests [18,19]. The importance of training was shown for direct interpretation of RDTs as well as for photographic assessment in Harvey et al. [19]. In both assessments correct interpretation was lowest for CHWs who used only manufacturer's instructions, better for CHWs who used a job aid and the best for CHWs who used a job aid and received three hours' training. Unfortunately, a risk of selection bias was present because CHWs were not randomly selected and completion of secondary education was 6, 19 and 35%, respectively. Some indications were also found for the beneficial effect of repetitive execution of RDTs. In Harvey et al. improvement was seen with each successive RDT, although these data were not  presented [19]. Improvement over time was also presented by Counihan et al. [18]; the percentage of CHWs correctly interpreting RDT results from patients or volunteers at three, six and 12 months after training was 95.1, 98.3 and 98.3%, respectively. In contrast, this was not the case with the ten-item photographic assessment in which four CHWs consistently showed poor interpretation.
Execution of RDTs was investigated in five studies that used non-uniform outcome variables (see Table 2). The way CHWs executed RDTs was judged on several items, but differences in number and definition of items further impaired comparison [18][19][20][21]32]. Nevertheless CHWs were found to correctly conduct RDTs if properly trained; 90 to 100% of steps were successfully executed in two studies that used the same WHO checklist, Hawkes et al. [21] and Harvey et al. [19]. In contrast, untrained CHWs that used only manufacturer's instructions or a job aid were found to respectively conduct only 57 and 80% of steps correctly in Harvey et al. [19]. The assessment of each individual executed step in this study showed that problems were found in dispensing buffer drops, waiting correct amount of time, pricking side of finger, blood collection and recording result in register. Counihan et al. [18], who assessed only the execution of eight RDT steps (see Additional file 4) that were considered critical for diagnosis or safety, showed improvement over time: 40.3, 61.7 and 79.7% of CHWs correctly performed critical steps at three, six and 12 months, respectively. Problematic steps were writing patient's name on cassette, recording results in register, usage of the blood collection loop, reading the test result in the right time and disposing non-sharps in non-sharps container [18][19][20]. Why these steps were problematic was not studied. No specific studies were done that looked at safety issues while performing RDTs but some included particular findings. Ndiaye et al. [20] observed that 0% of CHWs used gloves, but this was partly due to stock problems. In contrast, high levels of glove use were reported in Counihan et al. [18] (100% of CHWs after 12 months) and Harvey et al. [19] (96% in the group of trained CHWs). In Counihan et al. [18] an observer had to intervene once because a CHW was about to re-use a lancet on a new patient.
In general almost all patients (>90.0%) with positive RDTs were provided with anti-malarial drugs by CHWs ( Table 3). The percentage of patients with negative RDTs who, contradictory to the guidelines, still received antimalarial treatment was more variable, ranging from 0.2 to 58%. Six studies showed levels <10%, including all  iCCM studies, while two studies showed outliers of 20.3% [20] and 58% [30] of negative-tested patients that were treated. One other study presented the percentage of CHWs adhering to test results and showed that 30% of them treated negative-tested patients based on clinical judgment rather than RDT result; this was not related to previous experience in malaria management or educational background [27]. Ndiaye et al. [20] showed that the adherence was related to the type of care providers in their study. Community medicine distributors (CMDs) were only trained on RDT-based malaria management, while CHWs were attributed more health intervention tasks. CHWs gave artemisinin-combination therapy (ACT) to 24.8% of RDT negatives, while CMDs gave ACT to 10.4% of RDT negatives. Besides treating a high number of negative patients, CHWs also treated 22.3% of patients with ACT who were not tested at all, while for CMDs this was only 0.8%. Furthermore, CHWs and CMDs did not comply with the referral policy; referral rates from patient groups that should have been referred ranged from 18.2 to 47.1% with the lowest referral rates found for babies < two months of age and patients with severe symptoms. The only other study reporting on referral by CHWs showed better results, in the first year, 79.5% of RDT negatives were referred according to protocol and in the second year this had increased to 97.4% [25]. No explanations were given in the studies on reasons for nonadherence regarding treatment of negatives and referral.
Four trials assessed outcomes related to morbidity, mortality or both (Table 4), but all showed low quality evidence ( Figure 7) impairing firm conclusions. One study reported lower slide positivity rates during the RDT-based CCMm intervention period in comparison with presumptive CCMm in the pre-intervention period. However, besides changing to RDT-based diagnosis, the type of antimalarial drug used changed from sulphadoxinepyrimethamine to an ACT in this study [26]. Two other  studies showed beneficial effects of RDT-based CCMm but only compared it to areas with no CCMm [25,27]. In contrast, the perception of patients on morbidity did not improve with RDT-based CMMm. In a randomized, cross-over trial on RDT-based CCMm versus presumptive CCMm, a significant increased perception of disease recovery was found in the presumptively treated patients at day 7 compared with the intervention arm (97.3 versus 93.3%, p = 0.000). More patients were treated with antimalarials in the control group; however, in both the intervention and control group the perceived unrecovered patients harboured only few malaria positives (repeated testing at day 7), thus suggesting a possible bias in the subjective study outcome [24].
Studies by Mukanga et al. [35] in Uganda and Nsagha et al. [36] in Cameroon assessed the opinion of community members before introducing an RDT-based CCMm intervention. In Mukanga et al. [35] presumptive CCMm was already implemented and a positive attitude towards the CHWs was present, due to their voluntary services, accessibility and the effectiveness of provided drugs. The change to CHWs using RDTs was therefore well received. In Nsagha et al. [36] all participants would welcome RDTs, but in this urban setting, where other healthcare providers are available, CHWs were not always considered to be the appropriate persons to carry out RDTs. Participants in both studies stressed that proper training of CHWs on RDT use was considered essential.
A few years later Mukanga et al. [37] asked community members in Uganda for their opinion after introduction of RDT-based CCMm; 79.4% thought CHWs' service was better after introduction of RDTs and 88.7% thought CHWs should continue to use RDTs. Support for a high acceptance was also found in Senegal, where community members mainly praised the increased access to malaria care [38]. Furthermore, in several studies participants welcomed RDTs since it made correct diagnosis possible at the village level, which saved money on transport [27,36,38].
Acceptability of diagnosis and treatment by CHWs was related to the outcome of the RDT. Only 5% of CHWs had problems persuading RDT-positive patients of a malaria diagnosis in Sudan [27]. This is supported by Mubi et al. [24], in which 97.4% of patients complied to prescribed treatment after a positive RDT. However, persuading patients that they did not have malaria was problematic for 20% of CHWs in case of negative test results [27], an issue that was already predicted by Mukanga et al. [35].
Adherence to referral advice by patients was reported in only two studies [33,39]. Chanda et al. [33] used a system in which CHWs were notified by health centre staff if a referred patient visited the health centre. For 40 to 42% of the referrals feedback was received. In contrast, Thomson et al. [39] found a very low referral completion of 1.5%. They surveyed children three to 59 months and pregnant women in their second and third trimester in Sierra Leone. A large variation in referral completion was found within the different communities (0 to 18.8%). Furthermore, if stratified for RDT results, referral completion was 88.2% for RDT positives (usually referred for signs of severe malaria) in contrast to 0.9% for RDT negatives. Barriers for adherence    mentioned in focus group discussions were bad roads [38], difficulties in transport [38], distance to health centre [33,38] and lack of staff at the health centre which may result in long waiting hours [33].
Three studies reported on the uptake by the community of RDT-based CCMm in comparison to baseline levels (pre-intervention period), presumptive CCMm or health centre-based care (Table 5). Two studies showed an increased use of RDT-based CCMm services over the study period [15,27]. Additionally, one of the studies compared it to health centre-based care and showed a constant number of visits in these clinics. It was concluded that the overall access to malaria healthcare had thus increased by the intervention [15]. These positive findings are not always supported, as in a study of Lemma et al. [40], the number of people visiting the randomly selected CHWs who performed RDT-based CCMm was half of those visiting CHWs who used presumptive diagnosis. The reasons for this reduction were not further investigated. Obstacles for visiting the CHW mentioned by the community in three other studies were the unavailability of the CHW [16,37], dislike of CHW services [37], distrust of the skills of the CHWs [37], lack of drugs [37], fear of HIV/AIDs infection [35], a Hawkes [21] One day training. Pictorial job aid was provided.
100% of CHWs correctly interpreted the RDT directly after training.
Median score on a WHO 16-item assessment of RDT performance was 100% (range of 94-100%) directly after training.
Ndiaye [20] CHWs: one month theoretical training, one month practical training at health post. CMDs: 3-day theoretical training, 15 days practical training at health post.
-% CHWs and CMDs correctly performing the step, observed over two years.
(1) Surface clean and flat -87%
(2) Test opened just before use -100%
(3) Document patient name and date -83%
(4) Use of gloves -0%  99.0% 99.9% 7.6% * = correct treatment, ** = percentage of CHWs that relied on RDT results, *** = adherence percentages calculated from study data, **** = CHWs attended review meetings with study team each month discussing non-adherence to diagnostic and treatment algorithm with CHWs, HF = health facility, NS = not specified, AL = artemetherlumefantrine, SP = sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine, AS = artesunate, ACT = artemisinin-based combination therapy (not further specified), BF = Burkina Faso, Gh = Ghana, Ug = Uganda. Rutta [26] Pre-post study RDT-based CCMm (with AL)
Comparison with pre-intervention period (presumptive CCMm with SP)
A drop of >72.0% in malaria slide positivity rate to a persistent low level of <10% was observed in the study period.
Elmardi [27] Pre-post study RDT-based CCMm (with AS/SP).
Comparison with pre-intervention period (no CCMm, health centres treated with AS/SP) 24% fever cases in last two weeks pre-intervention and 8.5% fever cases post intervention (p = 0.000).
61 deaths (all <5 years) in the last season pre-implementation of intervention versus 1 death (>5 years) in the season post-implementation (p = 0.000).
disease that is perceived to be too severe for CHW to handle [16], and the relative distance to the health centre versus to the CHW [16,37].
In the pre-intervention focus group discussions in the study of Mukanga et al. [35], problems in lack of transport for replenishment of supplies were foreseen. Four studies mentioned stock-out problems [18,20,33,38].
The only other study that mentioned supply issues did not experience any stock-out problems [27]. In all studies the CHW was instructed to replenish stocks at an affiliated health centre. Blanas et al. [38] found in 2009 that 74% of villages did not have RDTs or the RDTs were expired. In 68% of villages no ACT was available. However, Ndiaye et al. [20] found in the same study area in 2010 and 2011, that 90.2% of CHWs had RDTs in stock and 88% had sufficient ACT in stock. It seems that experience over time helped stock management, although in the latter study only 11.8% of all stock management forms were completed. Stock-out problems were also found in the studies of Chanda et al. [33] (stock-outs of RDTs for about two weeks) and Counihan et al. [18] (stock-outs of drugs and RDTs). One of the biggest problems for CHWs in the latter study was the refusal of health centres to resupply the CHWs. Health centres were either not informed about the agreement on stock supply or they experienced stock-outs themselves [18].
Ndiaye et al. [20] showed that there was high seasonal variation in CHW participation in Senegal. This could be due to the difference in malaria burden but the authors also suspect that the little remuneration and the nearby gold mining activities had their impact on CHW participation. CHWs are mostly considered volunteers, but incentives such as small fees for their consultation [27], compensation in material form or services [16,17,23,29], or structured payments [17,24,26,30] were mentioned in most studies. In Elmardi et al. [27] only 35% of CHWs were satisfied with the financial outcome of their services which was 0.5 US$ per consultation. However, when these CHWs were asked about the most motivating aspect of their work, it was not the financial compensation but community respect and spiritual outcome. This was supported by Hamer et al. [17] in which only four of 18 CHWs received some kind of payment, but almost all were satisfied or highly satisfied with their CHW job (37 and 61%, respectively). There was no information on the impact of incentives and motivation on the attrition of CHWs.
Two studies on cost-effectiveness compared RDT-based CCMm to presumptive CCMm [21,22] and a third compared it with health centre-based malaria care [23] ( Table 6). All three studies did not have sufficient quality for cost-effectiveness analyses as described in risk of bias summary and all used a short-term outcome for health benefit, that is cost per correctly treated case [22,23], or related cost per case saved from unnecessary treatment [21]. Compared to health centre-based care, costs for RDTbased CCMm were lower per correctly treated case, but the additional cost per change in case appropriately diagnosed and treated was 4.18 US$ for RDT-based CCMm in Zambia [23]. RDT-based CCMm was also found to cost less compared with presumptive CCMm for areas with low to medium malaria transmission [22], but not in high transmission areas as was shown in the Democratic Republic of Congo [21]. Furthermore, study region could be of importance as shown by Lemma et al. [22] in Ethiopia. The study was situated in an area where Plasmodium vivax is also prevalent and consequently the RDT that differentiated between types of malaria species showed the lowest costs per appropriately treated case. However, for total costs, only differentiating between P. falciparum malaria and all other fever cases was the cheapest option.
This review showed that CHWs are able to provide qualitative health care for malaria if properly trained. This is substantiated by other reviews for shared outcomes [5][6][7]. Nevertheless some barriers are present for the success of the intervention. The success and failure of each of the steps in CCMm is discussed below. Tayler-Smith [15] RDT-based CCMm free of charge Health centre care, little payment was required for ACT.
In two years there was an increase in number of episodes of treated malaria per child per year from 0.4 to 1.2 for CHWs, whereas it remained stable at 0.2 for health centres.
The high quality of care is reflected in the good sensitivity and specificity of RDTs used by CHWs compared with microscopy. A high sensitivity is needed because, as the new first line of health care, RDT-based CCMm cannot be inferior in detecting malaria cases to the existing practices in health centres in which microscopy is often used, especially because it seems that RDT negatives, including false negatives, may not always reach a health centre for additional care [33,39]. When the RDTs performed by CHWs were compared to PCR the sensitivity lowered but many of these cases were also missed by microscopy [29]. Furthermore, the clinical relevance of these low parasitaemia cases is being debated, because they are considered to be ubiquitous and usually asymptomatic, although it might cause anaemia [41]. Recent indications of a decreased malaria transmission in regions in SSA could however lead to lower levels of immunity in the population and might subsequently increase disease susceptibility, also for subjects with low parasitaemia levels [42]. RDT performance in case of low parasitaemia levels will therefore become increasingly important, especially in elimination settings.
Specificity levels were more variable, which is also seen in RDT use by professional health-care workers [43]. This is a potential threat to the success of CCMm as it could lead to overtreatment and missed diagnoses of other febrile illnesses. This could be a reason to promote the implementation of iCCM, as other serious causes of fever, such as pneumonia, will be detected with this intervention. Factors influencing specificity could be microscopy slide quality [24] and persistent circulating HRP2 antigens (the diagnostic target of P. falciparum RDTs) after clearance of the malaria infection [44]. The latter might explain a lower specificity when a substantial part of individuals received previous anti-malarial treatment [30] and the lower specificity for individuals with a higher immunity against malaria, such as children > five years of age in Ishengoma et al. [28] and in Chinkhumba et al. [30]. Another possibility for a low specificity, though controversial, could be that RDTs are more sensitive than microscopy, meaning that false positives were actually true positives [43]. Support for this conclusion may be found in Ratsimbasoa et al. who showed a higher specificity if RDTs were compared with PCR than if RDTs were compared with microscopy [29].
The performance of RDTs did not seem to be much influenced by execution and interpretation of RDTs, as these showed generally good results. It should however be considered that all results were collected by (in)direct evaluation of the CHWs and this may have biased the outcome [45]. Job aid and training were factors positively associated with interpretation and execution of RDTs, however, this improvement could also be related to the selection bias in CHWs. That would imply CHWs perform better with higher educational background. Nevertheless progress may still be obtained by increased practice of RDTs during training [18,19], especially practice of interpretation of faint positives and invalid test results and practice of the steps that were found to be frequently problematic; these were collecting blood in the right way and in the right amount, dispensing buffer drops in the right amount and in the right well, registering patient data and waiting the correct time before reading test results [18][19][20]. It is unknown why these steps were more problematic. Only one study reported an event with high safety risk [18], but safety issues should always be well addressed during training. Furthermore, visual impairments may hamper the correct interpretation of RDTs [34] and therefore screening for visual impairments should be done before appointing new CHWs.
RDT performance could also have been influenced by 1) storage conditions [46], which stresses the need of a cold chain, or 2) type of RDT, because of variable intrinsic diagnostic qualities and differences in ease of execution and interpretation. Many types of RDTs are available and not enough evidence was found in this review to advise on a specific type of test. Guidance for RDT choice can be found in a published WHO report which shows an extended overview of all different malaria RDTs, although it should be noted that these were tested in regulated circumstances by laboratory technicians, thus not informing on end-user impact [47]. Adherence to test results and referral guidelines is important for safe and successful implementation of RDTbased CCMm and the reviewed literature highlighted that CHWs showed generally high levels of adherence to test results regarding treatment. This in contrast to professional healthcare workers, in whom adherence was found to be much more variable because they often rely on clinical judgment instead of RDT results [48][49][50][51][52] and the fear of false-negative RDT results may tempt them to treat negative patients, especially in the case of subjects with no or little malaria immunity [53]. It could be that these reasons also contributed to the few studies on CHWs who reported non-adherence to negative test results [20,27,30], especially because CHWs were previously instructed to regard any fever case as malaria. This is however unknown since CHW reasons for not adhering to negative test results were not investigated, although several studies stressed the importance of training and monitoring in order for CHWs to adhere to the study guidelines [17,18,23,24,26,28,30,32,33,40]. Interestingly, all studies with an iCCM design showed good adherence to negative RDT results. The provided alternatives for malaria treatment in iCCM, such as antibiotic treatment for pneumonia after diagnosis with a respiratory rate timer, could have contributed positively to this adherence.
Unfortunately, despite the importance of referring patients with danger signs, adherence to referral policy is scarcely addressed, with one study reporting low [20] and one reporting high adherence [25]. Again, why CHWs did not refer patients was not studied. From the patient perspective, two studies investigated referral completion and showed that many patients did not follow up on referral, although the big difference in magnitude between these studies is remarkable [33,39]. Possible barriers for patients to complete referral were found to be mostly due to transportation difficulties; a problem that is even bigger for health centre-based care and one that is not easily solved, although iCCM could reduce the overall need for referral. Other barriers were not thoroughly investigated; however an interesting finding was that RDT result apparently influenced referral completion [39].
Studies on morbidity and mortality lacked high quality evidence which impairs firm conclusions. CCMm should be beneficial compared with presumptive CCMm by decreasing overtreatment, and increasing diagnoses of other diseases. However, false negative RDT results could negate the beneficial effects. The low evidence is surprising, but may reflect the more challenging design needed, which should incorporate follow-up of all patients.
The effect on morbidity and mortality in the total population is dependent on acceptability and healthcareseeking behaviour of the community, which was found to increase within the community after introduction of RDT-based CCMm. It should, however, be noted that the studies reporting on the uptake of CCMm with RDTs took place during a trial, which could influence the way people behave. This effect is better known as the Hawthorne effect [45]. Several aspects were mentioned as barriers of CCMm uptake in the reviewed studies. Even though CHWs are mostly selected by the community or community leaders and must often meet certain criteria of educational background, barriers related to distrust of the CHW are mentioned [37]. How often distrust is a problem and what this is based upon is unknown. Better understanding of distrust might help in correctly sensitizing the community to increase acceptance and uptake of CCMm. Other barriers are logistical factors such as distance and transport to CHW, unavailability of CHW and stock outs. As CCMm already brings malaria care closer to the patient's home, problems of distance and transport are not specific for community based healthcare and are difficult to solve. Unavailability of the CHW might be related to too little remuneration, limiting CHWs in their time because they must take care of their livelihood. CHW remuneration is shortly discussed below. The issue of stock-outs seems to be a frequent problem for RDTs and anti-malarial drugs [18,20,33,38]. Next to the failure to provide patients the care they need at these moments, even the rumour of stock-out could prevent people from visiting CHWs [37]. The problem might be even bigger after trial termination because stock supply is usually more strictly regulated during study periods. Experience with stock management by CHWs may have a positive influence on the availability [20], but stock management by CHWs is not always the main barrier [33]. CHWs usually rely on nearby health facilities for their stock supply but, due to financial, logistical, political, and other factors, drug supply through the government health systems is often unreliable and shortages of essential drugs are common in health centres as well, especially in the most remote areas [54].
Another issue important for sustainability of RDT-based CCMm is CHWs' motivation and remuneration. It is unfortunate that information is scarce and there is no evaluation of motivation and the remuneration alternatives on the subsequent retention of CHWs in RDTbased CCMm. However, respect by the community and spiritual outcomes seem to be important for motivation. This was also reported in a recent Cochrane review that informed on motivation for lay health workers involved in all types of healthcare interventions [55]. Altruism, social recognition, knowledge gain, and career development were mentioned as motivations. Discrepancies were found in opinions on payment as incentive; supporters thought their time investment and obtained skills should be compensated, opponents thought working in a profitoriented way can evoke negative reactions within the community [56]. Non-monetary incentives, such as bicycles, uniforms, mobile phones, or health insurance were generally well appreciated [56,57].
The last important item for long-term implementation, in particular for policy makers, is cost-effectiveness. Costeffectiveness is highly dependent on malaria transmission, infrastructure and existing health systems. It can be concluded from the reviewed literature that the possible monetary beneficial effects of RDT-based CCMm versus presumptive CCMm are the biggest in areas with low to moderate malaria prevalence, at least for the costs per correctly treated case. With declining malaria prevalence in many SSA countries, RDT-based CCMm will probably become increasingly cost-effective [58]. However, because of limitations in the study designs these cost-effectiveness analyses are not informative enough for policy makers. Most importantly not all health-related benefits were included, such as the effect on longer term morbidity and mortality. Also, the real-time information on malaria prevalence that can be obtained with RDT testing is of importance for malaria control programmes. Moreover, testing with RDTs enables CHWs to adequately treat other febrile diseases than malaria and is the first step in moving from CCMm to iCCM. Because of these additional benefits, cost-utility analyses on differences in disability or quality adjusted life years (DALYs or QALYs) would gain the most information on the actual effects for patients and the possible impact for society of RDT-based CCMm.
A number of limitations are present due to the scope of this review. First of all, for several outcomes only a few studies were found, limiting the amount of evidence. Moreover, the few studies found were sometimes of insufficient quality for the relevant outcome, such as for morbidity and mortality. In general, very few studies investigated the factors that could explain why some of the critical steps in CCMm are successful or not. Secondly, in contrast to outcomes of diagnostic quality, cost-effectiveness, or impact of intervention on morbidity or mortality, it was challenging to assess the risk of bias for the remaining outcomes, because criteria for quality assessment were not standardized. Thirdly, most outcomes were investigated in trial settings, in which logistics are frequently well arranged and motivation is high, but only until the end of the study period. The lack of implementation studies may therefore have caused a bias. Finally, the restriction of the review to CCMm prevented the use of studies on iCCM without distinguishable CCMm data, but this was the only way to establish the benefits and failures of the individual intervention for the fight against malaria. Nevertheless, integrated CCM is an important development that may lead to increased access to targeted healthcare, without jeopardizing but potentially even improving malaria care.
Although the data presented in this review give a wealth of information, several aspects warrant further studies. First of all, no firm conclusions can be made on the absolute impact of the test and treat policies on morbidity and mortality. Further studies appropriately designed to measure this effect are needed and should preferably include follow-up of all patients, including referred and RDTnegative patients to also estimate the change in detection of other febrile diseases. Proven effect on morbidity and mortality will help policy makers in their decision about implementation of the intervention. Furthermore, this review has shown that social science contributions are scarce. This limits the understanding of the implementation of RDT-based CCMm in different local contexts. Multidisciplinary approaches in which biomedical and social sciences asses the intervention, both by qualitative and quantitative methods, are needed. Factors influencing adherence to test results, referral completion, acceptance and uptake of the intervention and CHW attrition need to be more thoroughly investigated. Moreover, research is required to assess the best and most sustainable way of (re)training and supervising CHWs.
Little is published on logistic and structural elements, which would allow the design of a sustainable programme. Therefore, the system of stock supply and stock management throughout the healthcare system should be outlined and analysed to detect the problem areas.
Despite limitations of the currently available evidence, several recommendations can be made for the design and implementation of CCMm. It is most important that CHWs receive a training in which they have enough opportunity to practice the difficult steps and interpretation of RDTs to ensure adequate execution and interpretation of the tests and consequently ensure the most optimal test performance. Furthermore, the risks derived from potentially lower specificity may be outweighed if iCCM is implemented. A job aid, repeated training and supervision can subsequently enhance the overall performance of CHWs, including adherence to test results. Again, further improvement in adherence can be obtained by implementing iCCM. Community sensitization is needed to ensure comprehension of the intervention and trust in the skills of the CHW. Furthermore, it might stimulate adherence to treatment and referral advice. The stock management system needs to be elucidated and stock management training should be an integrated part in the CHW and health centre staff training.
Malaria affects over 300 million people every year, with around 90% of infections occurring in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) [1,2]. Community case management of malaria (CCMm), formerly known as home based management of malaria, is a strategy recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) which aims at reducing the malaria burden by improving early access to malaria directed healthcare [3]. It is based on treatment of malaria cases, mainly children, by community health workers (CHWs), within the community. Different cadres exist for CHWs, but all these individuals have in common that they are part of the community, they are not professional healthcare workers but receive a short training and often work on a voluntary basis or for small compensation (although in some countries they are included in the salaried healthcare system). While fever cases were previously treated presumptively with anti-malarials, CCMm programmes are now expected to follow the WHO recommendation to treat only malaria patients with confirmed diagnosis, usually with rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) [4]. It is expected that this will reduce unnecessary malaria treatment and increase correct diagnosis in patients suffering from other febrile illnesses. Three published reviews describe RDT use in CCMm, however, the issues discussed in these reviews are limited [5,6] and not all of the important literature was included [6], or CHWs were not distinguished from professional healthcare providers [7]. Systematically obtained information on the success or failure of critical steps in RDT-based CCMm is lacking, but is needed in order to show its value in malaria control programmes. Furthermore, the WHO currently advises to proceed to integrated community case management (iCCM) [8], which focuses on the diagnosis and treatment of multiple diseases such as malaria, pneumonia and diarrhoea, and lessons from CCMm should be used during this transition. This systematic review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the success or failure of critical steps in CCMm with rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs).
A systematic search was performed in the databases of Medline, Embase, the Cochrane Library and the library of the 'Malaria in Pregnancy' consortium (MIP consortium). Web of Science was used to search for missed relevant studies in references and citing articles. The databases were last searched on October 12, 2013. Synonyms for 'malaria' , 'RDT' and 'CHW' were combined to find all relevant studies. For the complete search syntax see Additional file 1.
After removal of duplicates, title and abstract of articles were screened for in-and exclusion criteria by two independent readers (ER and PFM). A second screening was performed on full text articles. Discrepant results were resolved by discussion until a unanimous decision was reached. Criteria for inclusion were: original studies on RDT-based CCMm performed by CHWs defined as non-professional healthcare workers working within a community, studies on Plasmodium falciparum malaria, studies on one of the following critical steps: test performance by CHWs, execution of test, test interpretation, adherence to test results by CHWs, effect on morbidity and mortality, adherence to test results by patients, referral completion, social acceptance, community uptake, stock-outs, CHW incentives and motivation and cost-effectiveness. Exclusion criteria were: studies on iCMM in which the individual effect of RDT-based CCMm on the outcome cannot be identified and studies outside SSA. The focus on SSA was chosen because of the specific malaria epidemiology with a high burden of P. falciparum malaria and high morbidity and mortality rates [9]. Authors of relevant conference abstracts were contacted for more detailed results and information on methodology; in case of no additional information, no response, or if full study details did not meet in-or exclusion criteria, these abstracts were excluded.
Data were extracted from included studies by two independent readers (ER and PFM) and additionally for social-behavioural themes by SD and KPG. Critical appraisal was done in Review Manager [10] for intervention and diagnostic studies. Evers checklist was used for studies on cost-effectiveness according to Cochrane advice [11]. For all other studies, criteria are not well defined in literature, so criteria were defined per outcome. No studies were discarded based on qualitative assessment. If possible, separate data for CCMm from studies on integrated CCM (iCCM) were extracted.
A forest plot was created of the RDT test characteristics by the use of Review Manager. No meta-analysis was performed due to heterogeneity of study characteristics and outcomes. The same heterogeneity accounts for adherence to test results. For the analysis of social-behavioural themes, NVivo Software for qualitative data analysis (QSR International Pty Ltd Cardigan, UK) was used.
In total, 295 articles were found, of which 293 were by database searching and two via other sources. The latter articles were found after e-mail contact with authors of two abstracts [12,13]. Both referred to an article that could not be found in any of the databases [14,15]. After removal of duplications and after the screening steps on inclusion and exclusion criteria 27 articles remained for data extraction ( Figure 1). Exact reasons for exclusion of full text articles can be found in Additional file 2. One article [16] provided the same outcome information as another [17] (based on the same study) and is, therefore, not separately discussed.
In Additional file 3, an overview of the included studies is presented and for each of the critical steps the number of articles and relevant articles are indicated. Most of the articles were published between 2008 and 2013.
Risk of bias was assessed for each study for every outcome (Figures 2,3,4,5,6,7,8 and 9). Nearly all studies on RDT performance showed low risks of bias. The same accounted for RDT execution, although Counihan et al. [18] sometimes used non-febrile volunteers instead of patients for RDT observations and Harvey et al. [19] showed baseline differences in the groups of CHWs. Adherence to test results showed little bias, although it was often unclear how studies collected data. One study on adherence showed a possible patient selection bias because a large group of malaria-suspected patients was not tested at all [20]. More variable quality was found in studies on interpretation, healthcare-seeking behaviour, stock-outs and cost-effectiveness. In all three cost-effectiveness studies, debatable assumptions were made: sensitivity and specificity used for calculations were derived from studies on professional healthcare workers instead of CHWs [21][22][23]. Furthermore, in two cost-effectiveness analyses adherence to test results was assumed to be 100% [21,22]. High risk of bias was seen for all studies concerning morbidity and mortality; none met the preferred intervention design of a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial (RCT). At the same time, blinding patients and CHWs is impossible for this type of intervention. It is therefore unfortunate that the one study that described a non-blinded cluster RCT used a subjective outcome measure (patients' reporting of clinical recovery), potentially introducing bias [24]. The other studies were either not randomized [25], or were single-armed, pre-and post-intervention studies [26,27]. It should be noted that studies that showed high risk of bias for a certain outcome did not necessarily show high risk of bias for their main objective.
Sensitivity and specificity of RDTs when performed by CHWs was assessed in seven studies ( Figure 10 and Table 1). Studies differed in participants, malaria transmission and RDT type used. Sensitivities ranged between 83.2 and 97.9% if RDTs were compared with microscopy as reference standard. Ishengoma et al. found that the sensitivity was significantly higher for cases < five years of age and for fever cases [28]. Sensitivity decreased with decreasing malaria transmission over the years in this study [28], but this was not confirmed in Tiono et al. [14]. Ratsimbasoa et al. additionally calculated RDT sensitivity with PCR as reference standard (RS) and found a sensitivity of 61.8% [29].
The specificity of RDTs in the hands of CHWs was found to be more variable than the sensitivity, ranging from 39% in the study of Chinkhumba et al. [30] to 95.1% in the study of Lemma et al. [22]. In Chinkhumba et al. [30] patients who self-treated with anti-malarials (2-8% in previous two weeks) were not excluded and this was associated with a lower specificity. Mubi et al. [24] also showed low specificity, but it was mentioned that the microscopy slides were of poor quality, possibly impairing the detection of parasites in actual true positive samples. Slide quality was not mentioned in Tiono et al. [14], who found a low specificity, especially in the high transmission season (25.4%). The conditions for RDT storage were appropriate and the authors mainly related the results to persistent circulating antigens [14]. In Ishengoma et al. a higher specificity for children < five years of age was shown compared with older patients [28].
RDT interpretation was assessed by either direct assessment of RDTs (five studies) or by photographic assessment (two studies) (see Table 2). Correct interpretation was high for the direct assessment of RDTs; 96 to 100% of tests and 95.1 to 100% of CHWs, provided that CHWs were trained properly [18,19,21,32]. In photographic assessments, which have the inherent risk of selection bias as the number of ambiguous tests is relatively high, well-trained CHWs also scored high numbers of correctly interpreted tests, although more mistakes were made in reading faint positive and invalid tests [18,19]. The importance of training was shown for direct interpretation of RDTs as well as for photographic assessment in Harvey et al. [19]. In both assessments correct interpretation was lowest for CHWs who used only manufacturer's instructions, better for CHWs who used a job aid and the best for CHWs who used a job aid and received three hours' training. Unfortunately, a risk of selection bias was present because CHWs were not randomly selected and completion of secondary education was 6, 19 and 35%, respectively. Some indications were also found for the beneficial effect of repetitive execution of RDTs. In Harvey et al. improvement was seen with each successive RDT, although these data were not  presented [19]. Improvement over time was also presented by Counihan et al. [18]; the percentage of CHWs correctly interpreting RDT results from patients or volunteers at three, six and 12 months after training was 95.1, 98.3 and 98.3%, respectively. In contrast, this was not the case with the ten-item photographic assessment in which four CHWs consistently showed poor interpretation.
Execution of RDTs was investigated in five studies that used non-uniform outcome variables (see Table 2). The way CHWs executed RDTs was judged on several items, but differences in number and definition of items further impaired comparison [18][19][20][21]32]. Nevertheless CHWs were found to correctly conduct RDTs if properly trained; 90 to 100% of steps were successfully executed in two studies that used the same WHO checklist, Hawkes et al. [21] and Harvey et al. [19]. In contrast, untrained CHWs that used only manufacturer's instructions or a job aid were found to respectively conduct only 57 and 80% of steps correctly in Harvey et al. [19]. The assessment of each individual executed step in this study showed that problems were found in dispensing buffer drops, waiting correct amount of time, pricking side of finger, blood collection and recording result in register. Counihan et al. [18], who assessed only the execution of eight RDT steps (see Additional file 4) that were considered critical for diagnosis or safety, showed improvement over time: 40.3, 61.7 and 79.7% of CHWs correctly performed critical steps at three, six and 12 months, respectively. Problematic steps were writing patient's name on cassette, recording results in register, usage of the blood collection loop, reading the test result in the right time and disposing non-sharps in non-sharps container [18][19][20]. Why these steps were problematic was not studied. No specific studies were done that looked at safety issues while performing RDTs but some included particular findings. Ndiaye et al. [20] observed that 0% of CHWs used gloves, but this was partly due to stock problems. In contrast, high levels of glove use were reported in Counihan et al. [18] (100% of CHWs after 12 months) and Harvey et al. [19] (96% in the group of trained CHWs). In Counihan et al. [18] an observer had to intervene once because a CHW was about to re-use a lancet on a new patient.
In general almost all patients (>90.0%) with positive RDTs were provided with anti-malarial drugs by CHWs ( Table 3). The percentage of patients with negative RDTs who, contradictory to the guidelines, still received antimalarial treatment was more variable, ranging from 0.2 to 58%. Six studies showed levels <10%, including all  iCCM studies, while two studies showed outliers of 20.3% [20] and 58% [30] of negative-tested patients that were treated. One other study presented the percentage of CHWs adhering to test results and showed that 30% of them treated negative-tested patients based on clinical judgment rather than RDT result; this was not related to previous experience in malaria management or educational background [27]. Ndiaye et al. [20] showed that the adherence was related to the type of care providers in their study. Community medicine distributors (CMDs) were only trained on RDT-based malaria management, while CHWs were attributed more health intervention tasks. CHWs gave artemisinin-combination therapy (ACT) to 24.8% of RDT negatives, while CMDs gave ACT to 10.4% of RDT negatives. Besides treating a high number of negative patients, CHWs also treated 22.3% of patients with ACT who were not tested at all, while for CMDs this was only 0.8%. Furthermore, CHWs and CMDs did not comply with the referral policy; referral rates from patient groups that should have been referred ranged from 18.2 to 47.1% with the lowest referral rates found for babies < two months of age and patients with severe symptoms. The only other study reporting on referral by CHWs showed better results, in the first year, 79.5% of RDT negatives were referred according to protocol and in the second year this had increased to 97.4% [25]. No explanations were given in the studies on reasons for nonadherence regarding treatment of negatives and referral.
Four trials assessed outcomes related to morbidity, mortality or both (Table 4), but all showed low quality evidence ( Figure 7) impairing firm conclusions. One study reported lower slide positivity rates during the RDT-based CCMm intervention period in comparison with presumptive CCMm in the pre-intervention period. However, besides changing to RDT-based diagnosis, the type of antimalarial drug used changed from sulphadoxinepyrimethamine to an ACT in this study [26]. Two other  studies showed beneficial effects of RDT-based CCMm but only compared it to areas with no CCMm [25,27]. In contrast, the perception of patients on morbidity did not improve with RDT-based CMMm. In a randomized, cross-over trial on RDT-based CCMm versus presumptive CCMm, a significant increased perception of disease recovery was found in the presumptively treated patients at day 7 compared with the intervention arm (97.3 versus 93.3%, p = 0.000). More patients were treated with antimalarials in the control group; however, in both the intervention and control group the perceived unrecovered patients harboured only few malaria positives (repeated testing at day 7), thus suggesting a possible bias in the subjective study outcome [24].
Studies by Mukanga et al. [35] in Uganda and Nsagha et al. [36] in Cameroon assessed the opinion of community members before introducing an RDT-based CCMm intervention. In Mukanga et al. [35] presumptive CCMm was already implemented and a positive attitude towards the CHWs was present, due to their voluntary services, accessibility and the effectiveness of provided drugs. The change to CHWs using RDTs was therefore well received. In Nsagha et al. [36] all participants would welcome RDTs, but in this urban setting, where other healthcare providers are available, CHWs were not always considered to be the appropriate persons to carry out RDTs. Participants in both studies stressed that proper training of CHWs on RDT use was considered essential.
A few years later Mukanga et al. [37] asked community members in Uganda for their opinion after introduction of RDT-based CCMm; 79.4% thought CHWs' service was better after introduction of RDTs and 88.7% thought CHWs should continue to use RDTs. Support for a high acceptance was also found in Senegal, where community members mainly praised the increased access to malaria care [38]. Furthermore, in several studies participants welcomed RDTs since it made correct diagnosis possible at the village level, which saved money on transport [27,36,38].
Acceptability of diagnosis and treatment by CHWs was related to the outcome of the RDT. Only 5% of CHWs had problems persuading RDT-positive patients of a malaria diagnosis in Sudan [27]. This is supported by Mubi et al. [24], in which 97.4% of patients complied to prescribed treatment after a positive RDT. However, persuading patients that they did not have malaria was problematic for 20% of CHWs in case of negative test results [27], an issue that was already predicted by Mukanga et al. [35].
Adherence to referral advice by patients was reported in only two studies [33,39]. Chanda et al. [33] used a system in which CHWs were notified by health centre staff if a referred patient visited the health centre. For 40 to 42% of the referrals feedback was received. In contrast, Thomson et al. [39] found a very low referral completion of 1.5%. They surveyed children three to 59 months and pregnant women in their second and third trimester in Sierra Leone. A large variation in referral completion was found within the different communities (0 to 18.8%). Furthermore, if stratified for RDT results, referral completion was 88.2% for RDT positives (usually referred for signs of severe malaria) in contrast to 0.9% for RDT negatives. Barriers for adherence    mentioned in focus group discussions were bad roads [38], difficulties in transport [38], distance to health centre [33,38] and lack of staff at the health centre which may result in long waiting hours [33].
Three studies reported on the uptake by the community of RDT-based CCMm in comparison to baseline levels (pre-intervention period), presumptive CCMm or health centre-based care (Table 5). Two studies showed an increased use of RDT-based CCMm services over the study period [15,27]. Additionally, one of the studies compared it to health centre-based care and showed a constant number of visits in these clinics. It was concluded that the overall access to malaria healthcare had thus increased by the intervention [15]. These positive findings are not always supported, as in a study of Lemma et al. [40], the number of people visiting the randomly selected CHWs who performed RDT-based CCMm was half of those visiting CHWs who used presumptive diagnosis. The reasons for this reduction were not further investigated. Obstacles for visiting the CHW mentioned by the community in three other studies were the unavailability of the CHW [16,37], dislike of CHW services [37], distrust of the skills of the CHWs [37], lack of drugs [37], fear of HIV/AIDs infection [35], a Hawkes [21] One day training. Pictorial job aid was provided.
100% of CHWs correctly interpreted the RDT directly after training.
Median score on a WHO 16-item assessment of RDT performance was 100% (range of 94-100%) directly after training.
Ndiaye [20] CHWs: one month theoretical training, one month practical training at health post. CMDs: 3-day theoretical training, 15 days practical training at health post.
-% CHWs and CMDs correctly performing the step, observed over two years.
(1) Surface clean and flat -87%
(2) Test opened just before use -100%
(3) Document patient name and date -83%
(4) Use of gloves -0%  99.0% 99.9% 7.6% * = correct treatment, ** = percentage of CHWs that relied on RDT results, *** = adherence percentages calculated from study data, **** = CHWs attended review meetings with study team each month discussing non-adherence to diagnostic and treatment algorithm with CHWs, HF = health facility, NS = not specified, AL = artemetherlumefantrine, SP = sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine, AS = artesunate, ACT = artemisinin-based combination therapy (not further specified), BF = Burkina Faso, Gh = Ghana, Ug = Uganda. Rutta [26] Pre-post study RDT-based CCMm (with AL)
Comparison with pre-intervention period (presumptive CCMm with SP)
A drop of >72.0% in malaria slide positivity rate to a persistent low level of <10% was observed in the study period.
Elmardi [27] Pre-post study RDT-based CCMm (with AS/SP).
Comparison with pre-intervention period (no CCMm, health centres treated with AS/SP) 24% fever cases in last two weeks pre-intervention and 8.5% fever cases post intervention (p = 0.000).
61 deaths (all <5 years) in the last season pre-implementation of intervention versus 1 death (>5 years) in the season post-implementation (p = 0.000).
disease that is perceived to be too severe for CHW to handle [16], and the relative distance to the health centre versus to the CHW [16,37].
In the pre-intervention focus group discussions in the study of Mukanga et al. [35], problems in lack of transport for replenishment of supplies were foreseen. Four studies mentioned stock-out problems [18,20,33,38].
The only other study that mentioned supply issues did not experience any stock-out problems [27]. In all studies the CHW was instructed to replenish stocks at an affiliated health centre. Blanas et al. [38] found in 2009 that 74% of villages did not have RDTs or the RDTs were expired. In 68% of villages no ACT was available. However, Ndiaye et al. [20] found in the same study area in 2010 and 2011, that 90.2% of CHWs had RDTs in stock and 88% had sufficient ACT in stock. It seems that experience over time helped stock management, although in the latter study only 11.8% of all stock management forms were completed. Stock-out problems were also found in the studies of Chanda et al. [33] (stock-outs of RDTs for about two weeks) and Counihan et al. [18] (stock-outs of drugs and RDTs). One of the biggest problems for CHWs in the latter study was the refusal of health centres to resupply the CHWs. Health centres were either not informed about the agreement on stock supply or they experienced stock-outs themselves [18].
Ndiaye et al. [20] showed that there was high seasonal variation in CHW participation in Senegal. This could be due to the difference in malaria burden but the authors also suspect that the little remuneration and the nearby gold mining activities had their impact on CHW participation. CHWs are mostly considered volunteers, but incentives such as small fees for their consultation [27], compensation in material form or services [16,17,23,29], or structured payments [17,24,26,30] were mentioned in most studies. In Elmardi et al. [27] only 35% of CHWs were satisfied with the financial outcome of their services which was 0.5 US$ per consultation. However, when these CHWs were asked about the most motivating aspect of their work, it was not the financial compensation but community respect and spiritual outcome. This was supported by Hamer et al. [17] in which only four of 18 CHWs received some kind of payment, but almost all were satisfied or highly satisfied with their CHW job (37 and 61%, respectively). There was no information on the impact of incentives and motivation on the attrition of CHWs.
Two studies on cost-effectiveness compared RDT-based CCMm to presumptive CCMm [21,22] and a third compared it with health centre-based malaria care [23] ( Table 6). All three studies did not have sufficient quality for cost-effectiveness analyses as described in risk of bias summary and all used a short-term outcome for health benefit, that is cost per correctly treated case [22,23], or related cost per case saved from unnecessary treatment [21]. Compared to health centre-based care, costs for RDTbased CCMm were lower per correctly treated case, but the additional cost per change in case appropriately diagnosed and treated was 4.18 US$ for RDT-based CCMm in Zambia [23]. RDT-based CCMm was also found to cost less compared with presumptive CCMm for areas with low to medium malaria transmission [22], but not in high transmission areas as was shown in the Democratic Republic of Congo [21]. Furthermore, study region could be of importance as shown by Lemma et al. [22] in Ethiopia. The study was situated in an area where Plasmodium vivax is also prevalent and consequently the RDT that differentiated between types of malaria species showed the lowest costs per appropriately treated case. However, for total costs, only differentiating between P. falciparum malaria and all other fever cases was the cheapest option.
This review showed that CHWs are able to provide qualitative health care for malaria if properly trained. This is substantiated by other reviews for shared outcomes [5][6][7]. Nevertheless some barriers are present for the success of the intervention. The success and failure of each of the steps in CCMm is discussed below. Tayler-Smith [15] RDT-based CCMm free of charge Health centre care, little payment was required for ACT.
In two years there was an increase in number of episodes of treated malaria per child per year from 0.4 to 1.2 for CHWs, whereas it remained stable at 0.2 for health centres.
The high quality of care is reflected in the good sensitivity and specificity of RDTs used by CHWs compared with microscopy. A high sensitivity is needed because, as the new first line of health care, RDT-based CCMm cannot be inferior in detecting malaria cases to the existing practices in health centres in which microscopy is often used, especially because it seems that RDT negatives, including false negatives, may not always reach a health centre for additional care [33,39]. When the RDTs performed by CHWs were compared to PCR the sensitivity lowered but many of these cases were also missed by microscopy [29]. Furthermore, the clinical relevance of these low parasitaemia cases is being debated, because they are considered to be ubiquitous and usually asymptomatic, although it might cause anaemia [41]. Recent indications of a decreased malaria transmission in regions in SSA could however lead to lower levels of immunity in the population and might subsequently increase disease susceptibility, also for subjects with low parasitaemia levels [42]. RDT performance in case of low parasitaemia levels will therefore become increasingly important, especially in elimination settings.
Specificity levels were more variable, which is also seen in RDT use by professional health-care workers [43]. This is a potential threat to the success of CCMm as it could lead to overtreatment and missed diagnoses of other febrile illnesses. This could be a reason to promote the implementation of iCCM, as other serious causes of fever, such as pneumonia, will be detected with this intervention. Factors influencing specificity could be microscopy slide quality [24] and persistent circulating HRP2 antigens (the diagnostic target of P. falciparum RDTs) after clearance of the malaria infection [44]. The latter might explain a lower specificity when a substantial part of individuals received previous anti-malarial treatment [30] and the lower specificity for individuals with a higher immunity against malaria, such as children > five years of age in Ishengoma et al. [28] and in Chinkhumba et al. [30]. Another possibility for a low specificity, though controversial, could be that RDTs are more sensitive than microscopy, meaning that false positives were actually true positives [43]. Support for this conclusion may be found in Ratsimbasoa et al. who showed a higher specificity if RDTs were compared with PCR than if RDTs were compared with microscopy [29].
The performance of RDTs did not seem to be much influenced by execution and interpretation of RDTs, as these showed generally good results. It should however be considered that all results were collected by (in)direct evaluation of the CHWs and this may have biased the outcome [45]. Job aid and training were factors positively associated with interpretation and execution of RDTs, however, this improvement could also be related to the selection bias in CHWs. That would imply CHWs perform better with higher educational background. Nevertheless progress may still be obtained by increased practice of RDTs during training [18,19], especially practice of interpretation of faint positives and invalid test results and practice of the steps that were found to be frequently problematic; these were collecting blood in the right way and in the right amount, dispensing buffer drops in the right amount and in the right well, registering patient data and waiting the correct time before reading test results [18][19][20]. It is unknown why these steps were more problematic. Only one study reported an event with high safety risk [18], but safety issues should always be well addressed during training. Furthermore, visual impairments may hamper the correct interpretation of RDTs [34] and therefore screening for visual impairments should be done before appointing new CHWs.
RDT performance could also have been influenced by 1) storage conditions [46], which stresses the need of a cold chain, or 2) type of RDT, because of variable intrinsic diagnostic qualities and differences in ease of execution and interpretation. Many types of RDTs are available and not enough evidence was found in this review to advise on a specific type of test. Guidance for RDT choice can be found in a published WHO report which shows an extended overview of all different malaria RDTs, although it should be noted that these were tested in regulated circumstances by laboratory technicians, thus not informing on end-user impact [47]. Adherence to test results and referral guidelines is important for safe and successful implementation of RDTbased CCMm and the reviewed literature highlighted that CHWs showed generally high levels of adherence to test results regarding treatment. This in contrast to professional healthcare workers, in whom adherence was found to be much more variable because they often rely on clinical judgment instead of RDT results [48][49][50][51][52] and the fear of false-negative RDT results may tempt them to treat negative patients, especially in the case of subjects with no or little malaria immunity [53]. It could be that these reasons also contributed to the few studies on CHWs who reported non-adherence to negative test results [20,27,30], especially because CHWs were previously instructed to regard any fever case as malaria. This is however unknown since CHW reasons for not adhering to negative test results were not investigated, although several studies stressed the importance of training and monitoring in order for CHWs to adhere to the study guidelines [17,18,23,24,26,28,30,32,33,40]. Interestingly, all studies with an iCCM design showed good adherence to negative RDT results. The provided alternatives for malaria treatment in iCCM, such as antibiotic treatment for pneumonia after diagnosis with a respiratory rate timer, could have contributed positively to this adherence.
Unfortunately, despite the importance of referring patients with danger signs, adherence to referral policy is scarcely addressed, with one study reporting low [20] and one reporting high adherence [25]. Again, why CHWs did not refer patients was not studied. From the patient perspective, two studies investigated referral completion and showed that many patients did not follow up on referral, although the big difference in magnitude between these studies is remarkable [33,39]. Possible barriers for patients to complete referral were found to be mostly due to transportation difficulties; a problem that is even bigger for health centre-based care and one that is not easily solved, although iCCM could reduce the overall need for referral. Other barriers were not thoroughly investigated; however an interesting finding was that RDT result apparently influenced referral completion [39].
Studies on morbidity and mortality lacked high quality evidence which impairs firm conclusions. CCMm should be beneficial compared with presumptive CCMm by decreasing overtreatment, and increasing diagnoses of other diseases. However, false negative RDT results could negate the beneficial effects. The low evidence is surprising, but may reflect the more challenging design needed, which should incorporate follow-up of all patients.
The effect on morbidity and mortality in the total population is dependent on acceptability and healthcareseeking behaviour of the community, which was found to increase within the community after introduction of RDT-based CCMm. It should, however, be noted that the studies reporting on the uptake of CCMm with RDTs took place during a trial, which could influence the way people behave. This effect is better known as the Hawthorne effect [45]. Several aspects were mentioned as barriers of CCMm uptake in the reviewed studies. Even though CHWs are mostly selected by the community or community leaders and must often meet certain criteria of educational background, barriers related to distrust of the CHW are mentioned [37]. How often distrust is a problem and what this is based upon is unknown. Better understanding of distrust might help in correctly sensitizing the community to increase acceptance and uptake of CCMm. Other barriers are logistical factors such as distance and transport to CHW, unavailability of CHW and stock outs. As CCMm already brings malaria care closer to the patient's home, problems of distance and transport are not specific for community based healthcare and are difficult to solve. Unavailability of the CHW might be related to too little remuneration, limiting CHWs in their time because they must take care of their livelihood. CHW remuneration is shortly discussed below. The issue of stock-outs seems to be a frequent problem for RDTs and anti-malarial drugs [18,20,33,38]. Next to the failure to provide patients the care they need at these moments, even the rumour of stock-out could prevent people from visiting CHWs [37]. The problem might be even bigger after trial termination because stock supply is usually more strictly regulated during study periods. Experience with stock management by CHWs may have a positive influence on the availability [20], but stock management by CHWs is not always the main barrier [33]. CHWs usually rely on nearby health facilities for their stock supply but, due to financial, logistical, political, and other factors, drug supply through the government health systems is often unreliable and shortages of essential drugs are common in health centres as well, especially in the most remote areas [54].
Another issue important for sustainability of RDT-based CCMm is CHWs' motivation and remuneration. It is unfortunate that information is scarce and there is no evaluation of motivation and the remuneration alternatives on the subsequent retention of CHWs in RDTbased CCMm. However, respect by the community and spiritual outcomes seem to be important for motivation. This was also reported in a recent Cochrane review that informed on motivation for lay health workers involved in all types of healthcare interventions [55]. Altruism, social recognition, knowledge gain, and career development were mentioned as motivations. Discrepancies were found in opinions on payment as incentive; supporters thought their time investment and obtained skills should be compensated, opponents thought working in a profitoriented way can evoke negative reactions within the community [56]. Non-monetary incentives, such as bicycles, uniforms, mobile phones, or health insurance were generally well appreciated [56,57].
The last important item for long-term implementation, in particular for policy makers, is cost-effectiveness. Costeffectiveness is highly dependent on malaria transmission, infrastructure and existing health systems. It can be concluded from the reviewed literature that the possible monetary beneficial effects of RDT-based CCMm versus presumptive CCMm are the biggest in areas with low to moderate malaria prevalence, at least for the costs per correctly treated case. With declining malaria prevalence in many SSA countries, RDT-based CCMm will probably become increasingly cost-effective [58]. However, because of limitations in the study designs these cost-effectiveness analyses are not informative enough for policy makers. Most importantly not all health-related benefits were included, such as the effect on longer term morbidity and mortality. Also, the real-time information on malaria prevalence that can be obtained with RDT testing is of importance for malaria control programmes. Moreover, testing with RDTs enables CHWs to adequately treat other febrile diseases than malaria and is the first step in moving from CCMm to iCCM. Because of these additional benefits, cost-utility analyses on differences in disability or quality adjusted life years (DALYs or QALYs) would gain the most information on the actual effects for patients and the possible impact for society of RDT-based CCMm.
A number of limitations are present due to the scope of this review. First of all, for several outcomes only a few studies were found, limiting the amount of evidence. Moreover, the few studies found were sometimes of insufficient quality for the relevant outcome, such as for morbidity and mortality. In general, very few studies investigated the factors that could explain why some of the critical steps in CCMm are successful or not. Secondly, in contrast to outcomes of diagnostic quality, cost-effectiveness, or impact of intervention on morbidity or mortality, it was challenging to assess the risk of bias for the remaining outcomes, because criteria for quality assessment were not standardized. Thirdly, most outcomes were investigated in trial settings, in which logistics are frequently well arranged and motivation is high, but only until the end of the study period. The lack of implementation studies may therefore have caused a bias. Finally, the restriction of the review to CCMm prevented the use of studies on iCCM without distinguishable CCMm data, but this was the only way to establish the benefits and failures of the individual intervention for the fight against malaria. Nevertheless, integrated CCM is an important development that may lead to increased access to targeted healthcare, without jeopardizing but potentially even improving malaria care.
Although the data presented in this review give a wealth of information, several aspects warrant further studies. First of all, no firm conclusions can be made on the absolute impact of the test and treat policies on morbidity and mortality. Further studies appropriately designed to measure this effect are needed and should preferably include follow-up of all patients, including referred and RDTnegative patients to also estimate the change in detection of other febrile diseases. Proven effect on morbidity and mortality will help policy makers in their decision about implementation of the intervention. Furthermore, this review has shown that social science contributions are scarce. This limits the understanding of the implementation of RDT-based CCMm in different local contexts. Multidisciplinary approaches in which biomedical and social sciences asses the intervention, both by qualitative and quantitative methods, are needed. Factors influencing adherence to test results, referral completion, acceptance and uptake of the intervention and CHW attrition need to be more thoroughly investigated. Moreover, research is required to assess the best and most sustainable way of (re)training and supervising CHWs.
Little is published on logistic and structural elements, which would allow the design of a sustainable programme. Therefore, the system of stock supply and stock management throughout the healthcare system should be outlined and analysed to detect the problem areas.
Despite limitations of the currently available evidence, several recommendations can be made for the design and implementation of CCMm. It is most important that CHWs receive a training in which they have enough opportunity to practice the difficult steps and interpretation of RDTs to ensure adequate execution and interpretation of the tests and consequently ensure the most optimal test performance. Furthermore, the risks derived from potentially lower specificity may be outweighed if iCCM is implemented. A job aid, repeated training and supervision can subsequently enhance the overall performance of CHWs, including adherence to test results. Again, further improvement in adherence can be obtained by implementing iCCM. Community sensitization is needed to ensure comprehension of the intervention and trust in the skills of the CHW. Furthermore, it might stimulate adherence to treatment and referral advice. The stock management system needs to be elucidated and stock management training should be an integrated part in the CHW and health centre staff training.

Figure 1

1Flow chart of search strategy.

Figure 2

2Risk of bias summary for test performance. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 3

3Risk of bias summary for direct interpretation of RDT. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 4

4Risk of bias summary for interpretation of photographs. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 5

5Risk of bias summary for RDT execution. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 6

6Risk of bias summary for adherence. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 7

7Risk of bias summary for intervention studies on morbidity and mortality. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 8

8Risk of bias summary for cost-effectiveness studies. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 9

9Risk of bias summary for healthcare-seeking behaviour. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 10

10Forest plot of RDT performance when performed by CHWs (no subgroup analyses). Lemma 2011a = Paracheck Pf, Lemma 2011b = Parascreen pan/p.

Table 1

1RDT test performance by CHWsStudy 
Target population 
RDT type 
Reference 
standard (RS)
RS positive* (%) Sensitivity (%) Specificity (%)
Ratsimbasoa [29] >2 months (history of) fever 
CareStart 
PCR 
56.7% 
61.8% 
95%
Ratsimbasoa [29] >2 months (history of) fever 
CareStart 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS
37.2% 
95.9% 
87%
Chinkhumba [30] >5 years (history of) fever 
Bioline SD, First Response 
malaria, Paracheck PF
Microscopy of 
thick BS (expert)
38.5% 
95% 
43%
Chinkhumba [30]** >5 years (history of) fever 
Bioline SD 
Microscopy of 
thick BS (expert).
41% 
97% 
39%
Chinkhumba [30]** >5 years (history of) fever 
First response malaria 
Microscopy of 
thick BS (expert).
40% 
92% 
42%
Ishengoma [28] 
All ages, care seeking 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS.
20.8% 
88.6% 
88.2%
Ishengoma [28] 
< 5 years 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS
19.7% 
90.1% 
93.6%
Ishengoma [28] 
≥5 years 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS
21% 
88.3% 
86.5%
Ishengoma [28] 
No fever patients 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS
14.5% 
84.7% 
90.1%
Ishengoma [28] 
Fever patients 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS
33.9% 
92.2% 
82.9%
Lemma [22]** 
>3 months suspected of malaria Paracheck Pf 
Microscopy of 
thick BS.
18.7% 
88.7% 
94.2%
Lemma [22]** 
>3 months suspected of malaria Parascreen 
Microscopy of 
thick BS.
18.7% 
83.2% 
95.1%
Mubi [24] 
>3 months (history of) fever. 
Paracheck Pf 
Microscopy of 
thick BS.
22.6% 
85.3% 
59.8%
Premji [31] 
Children <42 months 
Parasight TM-F test 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS.
66.6% 
84% 
81%
Tiono [14] 
Children 6-59 months 
with (history of) fever.
FirstSign Malaria Pf 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS.
54.8% 
97.9% 
53.4%
Tiono [14] 
Children 6-59 months 
with (history of) fever. 
(High transmission)
FirstSign Malaria Pf 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS.
76.1% 
98% 
25.4%
Tiono [14] 
Children 6-59 months 
with (history of) fever. 
(Low transmission)
FirstSign Malaria Pf 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS.
31.8% 
97.6% 
63.7%
*P. falciparum, **Two types of RDTs separately tested.

Table 2

2Interpretation and execution of RDTs by CHWsStudy 
CHW training 
Outcome interpretation 
Outcome execution
Counihan [18] Half-day training. At 3 months CHWs 
received a poster-sized job aid and a 
photographic guide on RDT 
interpretation.
(I) RDT test results correctly read by 95.1, 
98.3 and 98.3% of the CHWs at 3, 6 and 
12 months after training respectively.
19-item checklist, interpretation included, 
8 items were considered critical.
(II) Correct interpretation of positive RDT 
results was 96.5% at 3 months, 98.3% at 
6 months and 90.5% at 12 months.
Median correctly performed critical steps 
were 87.5%, 100% and 100% at 3, 6 and 
12 months respectively.
(II) Correct interpretation of negative RDT 
results was 94.3% at 3 months, 97.9% at 
6 months and 94.7% at 12 months.
40.3, 61.7 and 79.7% of CHWs correctly 
performed critical RDT steps at 3, 6 and 
12 months respectively.
(II) Faint positive lines were correctly 
interpreted by 89.7% at 3 months, 96.7% 
at 6 months and declined to 76.7% at 
12 months.
Mukanga [32] 8-day training by experienced trainers. 
Job aid provided.
100% of the RDTs were correctly interpreted 
shortly after training (<2 weeks).
96.3% of RDTs were correctly performed 
shortly after training (<2 weeks) in a 
14-item checklist, interpretation excluded.
Harvey [19] 
Group 1: only use of manufacturers' 
instructions. Group 2: only use of 
job aid. Group 3: 3-hour training on 
RDTs + job aid.
(I) 72, 86 and 96% of CHWs correctly 
interpreted RDT results for group 1, 2 
and 3 respectively.
57% of steps, 80% of steps and 90% of 
steps were correctly performed by group 
1, 2 and 3 respectively at the same day of 
receiving instructions, job aid or training in 
a 16-item checklist, interpretation included. 
(II) 54, 82 and 93% of tests were correctly 
interpreted for group 1, 2 and 3 respectively.

Table 3

3Adherence to test results by CHWsStudy 
Target population 
Treatment Alternative 
Adherence 
overall*
Positives 
treated
Negatives 
treated
CCMm studies
Chanda [23,33] 
All ages, care seeking. 
AL, SP <5 kg Complicated malaria and non-malaria 
febrile cases were referred to HF.
99.9% 
99.3% 
0.2%
Chinkhumba [30] >5 years, (history of) fever 
NS 
Referral not mentioned. 
86.9% 
98% 
58%
Elmardi [27] 
NS 
AS/SP 
Complicated malaria and non-malaria 
febrile cases were referred to HF.
70%** 
NS 
NS
Ishengoma [28] 
≥5 years with (history of) fever 
AL 
Referral not specified. 
95.8% 
98.9% 
5.4%
Mubi [24] 
>3 months, (history of) fever. 
Exclusion: severe disease
AL 
Referral not specified. 
96.8% 
99.7% 
6.1%
Ndiaye [20]*** 
Patients of all ages, care seeking. 
NS 
CHW: referral of patients <2 months, 
RDT negatives, severe symptoms, 
suspected drug adverse events. CMD: 
referral of all cases excluding 
uncomplicated malaria cases.
88.6% 
92.0% 
20.3%
Ndiaye [20]*** 
Patients of all ages, care seeking. 
NS 
CHW: Referral of patients <2 months, 
RDT negatives, severe symptoms, 
suspected drug adverse events.
85.6% 
90.1% 
24.8%
Ndiaye [20]*** 
Patients of all ages, care seeking. 
NS 
CMD: Referral of all cases excluding 
uncomplicated malaria cases.
93.9% 
95.3% 
10.4%
iCCM studies
Hamer [17] & 
Yeboah-Antwi [16]
Children 6 months-5 years, fever. 
AL 
Children with danger signs were 
referred to HF.
99.3% 
98.5% 
0.4%
Mukanga [32] 
Children <5 (history of) fever 
no danger signs.
AL 
CHWs also diagnosed and treated 
pneumonia. No referral mentioned.
97.8% 
98.6% 
4.8%
Mukanga [34]**** BF: 6-59 months, (history of) fever AL 
Referral for severe disease and for 
non-responders at day 3 after CHW visit.
99.0% 
100% 
4.8%
Mukanga [34]**** Gh: 6-59 months, (history of) fever AA 
Referral for severe disease and for 
non-responders at day 3 after CHW visit.
99.5% 
100% 
3.3%
Mukanga [34]**** Ug: 4-59 months (history of) fever. AL 
Referral for severe disease and for 
non-responders at day 3 after CHW visit.

Table 4

4Morbidity and mortality outcomes of RDT based CCMm strategiesStudy 
Design 
Intervention 
Control 
Outcome
Mubi [24] 
RCT 
RDT-based CCMm Presumptive CCMm 
Increased perception of recovery in control group (97.3%) 
versus intervention group (93.3%) at day 7. P = 0.000
Two malaria related deaths, one in each arm.
Thiam [25] 
NRCT 
RDT-based CCMm No CCMm 
Malaria related hospitalizations decreased by 43.1% in 
intervention areas and 40.9% in control areas. Malaria 
attributed deaths decreased by 62.5% in intervention 
areas (significant decrease) and 23.4% in control areas 
(no significant decrease).

Table 5

5Healthcare-seeking behaviourStudy 
Intervention 
Control 
Outcome
Elmardi [27] 
RDT-based CCMm 
Comparison with pre-intervention 
period (no CCMm)
Pre-intervention 25% of mothers of sick children <5 years would 
seek care within the village, after the study 64.7% would seek care 
within the village (p value).
Lemma [40] 
RDT-based CCMm 
Presumptive CCMm 
Only half the number of patients (5,123 patients) visited CHWs who 
performed RDT-based CCMm compared with presumptive CCMm 
(10,475 patients).

Table 6


Background

Malaria affects over 300 million people every year, with around 90% of infections occurring in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) [1,2]. Community case management of malaria (CCMm), formerly known as home based management of malaria, is a strategy recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) which aims at reducing the malaria burden by improving early access to malaria directed healthcare [3]. It is based on treatment of malaria cases, mainly children, by community health workers (CHWs), within the community. Different cadres exist for CHWs, but all these individuals have in common that they are part of the community, they are not professional healthcare workers but receive a short training and often work on a voluntary basis or for small compensation (although in some countries they are included in the salaried healthcare system). While fever cases were previously treated presumptively with anti-malarials, CCMm programmes are now expected to follow the WHO recommendation to treat only malaria patients with confirmed diagnosis, usually with rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) [4]. It is expected that this will reduce unnecessary malaria treatment and increase correct diagnosis in patients suffering from other febrile illnesses. Three published reviews describe RDT use in CCMm, however, the issues discussed in these reviews are limited [5,6] and not all of the important literature was included [6], or CHWs were not distinguished from professional healthcare providers [7]. Systematically obtained information on the success or failure of critical steps in RDT-based CCMm is lacking, but is needed in order to show its value in malaria control programmes. Furthermore, the WHO currently advises to proceed to integrated community case management (iCCM) [8], which focuses on the diagnosis and treatment of multiple diseases such as malaria, pneumonia and diarrhoea, and lessons from CCMm should be used during this transition. This systematic review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the success or failure of critical steps in CCMm with rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs).

Methods


Search methodology

A systematic search was performed in the databases of Medline, Embase, the Cochrane Library and the library of the 'Malaria in Pregnancy' consortium (MIP consortium). Web of Science was used to search for missed relevant studies in references and citing articles. The databases were last searched on October 12, 2013. Synonyms for 'malaria' , 'RDT' and 'CHW' were combined to find all relevant studies. For the complete search syntax see Additional file 1.

Selection of studies

After removal of duplicates, title and abstract of articles were screened for in-and exclusion criteria by two independent readers (ER and PFM). A second screening was performed on full text articles. Discrepant results were resolved by discussion until a unanimous decision was reached. Criteria for inclusion were: original studies on RDT-based CCMm performed by CHWs defined as non-professional healthcare workers working within a community, studies on Plasmodium falciparum malaria, studies on one of the following critical steps: test performance by CHWs, execution of test, test interpretation, adherence to test results by CHWs, effect on morbidity and mortality, adherence to test results by patients, referral completion, social acceptance, community uptake, stock-outs, CHW incentives and motivation and cost-effectiveness. Exclusion criteria were: studies on iCMM in which the individual effect of RDT-based CCMm on the outcome cannot be identified and studies outside SSA. The focus on SSA was chosen because of the specific malaria epidemiology with a high burden of P. falciparum malaria and high morbidity and mortality rates [9]. Authors of relevant conference abstracts were contacted for more detailed results and information on methodology; in case of no additional information, no response, or if full study details did not meet in-or exclusion criteria, these abstracts were excluded.

Data extraction

Data were extracted from included studies by two independent readers (ER and PFM) and additionally for social-behavioural themes by SD and KPG. Critical appraisal was done in Review Manager [10] for intervention and diagnostic studies. Evers checklist was used for studies on cost-effectiveness according to Cochrane advice [11]. For all other studies, criteria are not well defined in literature, so criteria were defined per outcome. No studies were discarded based on qualitative assessment. If possible, separate data for CCMm from studies on integrated CCM (iCCM) were extracted.

Analysis

A forest plot was created of the RDT test characteristics by the use of Review Manager. No meta-analysis was performed due to heterogeneity of study characteristics and outcomes. The same heterogeneity accounts for adherence to test results. For the analysis of social-behavioural themes, NVivo Software for qualitative data analysis (QSR International Pty Ltd Cardigan, UK) was used.

Results


Search results

In total, 295 articles were found, of which 293 were by database searching and two via other sources. The latter articles were found after e-mail contact with authors of two abstracts [12,13]. Both referred to an article that could not be found in any of the databases [14,15]. After removal of duplications and after the screening steps on inclusion and exclusion criteria 27 articles remained for data extraction ( Figure 1). Exact reasons for exclusion of full text articles can be found in Additional file 2. One article [16] provided the same outcome information as another [17] (based on the same study) and is, therefore, not separately discussed.
In Additional file 3, an overview of the included studies is presented and for each of the critical steps the number of articles and relevant articles are indicated. Most of the articles were published between 2008 and 2013.

Risk of bias summary

Risk of bias was assessed for each study for every outcome (Figures 2,3,4,5,6,7,8 and 9). Nearly all studies on RDT performance showed low risks of bias. The same accounted for RDT execution, although Counihan et al. [18] sometimes used non-febrile volunteers instead of patients for RDT observations and Harvey et al. [19] showed baseline differences in the groups of CHWs. Adherence to test results showed little bias, although it was often unclear how studies collected data. One study on adherence showed a possible patient selection bias because a large group of malaria-suspected patients was not tested at all [20]. More variable quality was found in studies on interpretation, healthcare-seeking behaviour, stock-outs and cost-effectiveness. In all three cost-effectiveness studies, debatable assumptions were made: sensitivity and specificity used for calculations were derived from studies on professional healthcare workers instead of CHWs [21][22][23]. Furthermore, in two cost-effectiveness analyses adherence to test results was assumed to be 100% [21,22]. High risk of bias was seen for all studies concerning morbidity and mortality; none met the preferred intervention design of a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial (RCT). At the same time, blinding patients and CHWs is impossible for this type of intervention. It is therefore unfortunate that the one study that described a non-blinded cluster RCT used a subjective outcome measure (patients' reporting of clinical recovery), potentially introducing bias [24]. The other studies were either not randomized [25], or were single-armed, pre-and post-intervention studies [26,27]. It should be noted that studies that showed high risk of bias for a certain outcome did not necessarily show high risk of bias for their main objective.

RDT performance when used by CHWs

Sensitivity and specificity of RDTs when performed by CHWs was assessed in seven studies ( Figure 10 and Table 1). Studies differed in participants, malaria transmission and RDT type used. Sensitivities ranged between 83.2 and 97.9% if RDTs were compared with microscopy as reference standard. Ishengoma et al. found that the sensitivity was significantly higher for cases < five years of age and for fever cases [28]. Sensitivity decreased with decreasing malaria transmission over the years in this study [28], but this was not confirmed in Tiono et al. [14]. Ratsimbasoa et al. additionally calculated RDT sensitivity with PCR as reference standard (RS) and found a sensitivity of 61.8% [29].
The specificity of RDTs in the hands of CHWs was found to be more variable than the sensitivity, ranging from 39% in the study of Chinkhumba et al. [30] to 95.1% in the study of Lemma et al. [22]. In Chinkhumba et al. [30] patients who self-treated with anti-malarials (2-8% in previous two weeks) were not excluded and this was associated with a lower specificity. Mubi et al. [24] also showed low specificity, but it was mentioned that the microscopy slides were of poor quality, possibly impairing the detection of parasites in actual true positive samples. Slide quality was not mentioned in Tiono et al. [14], who found a low specificity, especially in the high transmission season (25.4%). The conditions for RDT storage were appropriate and the authors mainly related the results to persistent circulating antigens [14]. In Ishengoma et al. a higher specificity for children < five years of age was shown compared with older patients [28].

RDT interpretation

RDT interpretation was assessed by either direct assessment of RDTs (five studies) or by photographic assessment (two studies) (see Table 2). Correct interpretation was high for the direct assessment of RDTs; 96 to 100% of tests and 95.1 to 100% of CHWs, provided that CHWs were trained properly [18,19,21,32]. In photographic assessments, which have the inherent risk of selection bias as the number of ambiguous tests is relatively high, well-trained CHWs also scored high numbers of correctly interpreted tests, although more mistakes were made in reading faint positive and invalid tests [18,19]. The importance of training was shown for direct interpretation of RDTs as well as for photographic assessment in Harvey et al. [19]. In both assessments correct interpretation was lowest for CHWs who used only manufacturer's instructions, better for CHWs who used a job aid and the best for CHWs who used a job aid and received three hours' training. Unfortunately, a risk of selection bias was present because CHWs were not randomly selected and completion of secondary education was 6, 19 and 35%, respectively. Some indications were also found for the beneficial effect of repetitive execution of RDTs. In Harvey et al. improvement was seen with each successive RDT, although these data were not  presented [19]. Improvement over time was also presented by Counihan et al. [18]; the percentage of CHWs correctly interpreting RDT results from patients or volunteers at three, six and 12 months after training was 95.1, 98.3 and 98.3%, respectively. In contrast, this was not the case with the ten-item photographic assessment in which four CHWs consistently showed poor interpretation.

Execution of RDTs

Execution of RDTs was investigated in five studies that used non-uniform outcome variables (see Table 2). The way CHWs executed RDTs was judged on several items, but differences in number and definition of items further impaired comparison [18][19][20][21]32]. Nevertheless CHWs were found to correctly conduct RDTs if properly trained; 90 to 100% of steps were successfully executed in two studies that used the same WHO checklist, Hawkes et al. [21] and Harvey et al. [19]. In contrast, untrained CHWs that used only manufacturer's instructions or a job aid were found to respectively conduct only 57 and 80% of steps correctly in Harvey et al. [19]. The assessment of each individual executed step in this study showed that problems were found in dispensing buffer drops, waiting correct amount of time, pricking side of finger, blood collection and recording result in register. Counihan et al. [18], who assessed only the execution of eight RDT steps (see Additional file 4) that were considered critical for diagnosis or safety, showed improvement over time: 40.3, 61.7 and 79.7% of CHWs correctly performed critical steps at three, six and 12 months, respectively. Problematic steps were writing patient's name on cassette, recording results in register, usage of the blood collection loop, reading the test result in the right time and disposing non-sharps in non-sharps container [18][19][20]. Why these steps were problematic was not studied. No specific studies were done that looked at safety issues while performing RDTs but some included particular findings. Ndiaye et al. [20] observed that 0% of CHWs used gloves, but this was partly due to stock problems. In contrast, high levels of glove use were reported in Counihan et al. [18] (100% of CHWs after 12 months) and Harvey et al. [19] (96% in the group of trained CHWs). In Counihan et al. [18] an observer had to intervene once because a CHW was about to re-use a lancet on a new patient.

Adherence to test results and referral guidelines by CHWs

In general almost all patients (>90.0%) with positive RDTs were provided with anti-malarial drugs by CHWs ( Table 3). The percentage of patients with negative RDTs who, contradictory to the guidelines, still received antimalarial treatment was more variable, ranging from 0.2 to 58%. Six studies showed levels <10%, including all  iCCM studies, while two studies showed outliers of 20.3% [20] and 58% [30] of negative-tested patients that were treated. One other study presented the percentage of CHWs adhering to test results and showed that 30% of them treated negative-tested patients based on clinical judgment rather than RDT result; this was not related to previous experience in malaria management or educational background [27]. Ndiaye et al. [20] showed that the adherence was related to the type of care providers in their study. Community medicine distributors (CMDs) were only trained on RDT-based malaria management, while CHWs were attributed more health intervention tasks. CHWs gave artemisinin-combination therapy (ACT) to 24.8% of RDT negatives, while CMDs gave ACT to 10.4% of RDT negatives. Besides treating a high number of negative patients, CHWs also treated 22.3% of patients with ACT who were not tested at all, while for CMDs this was only 0.8%. Furthermore, CHWs and CMDs did not comply with the referral policy; referral rates from patient groups that should have been referred ranged from 18.2 to 47.1% with the lowest referral rates found for babies < two months of age and patients with severe symptoms. The only other study reporting on referral by CHWs showed better results, in the first year, 79.5% of RDT negatives were referred according to protocol and in the second year this had increased to 97.4% [25]. No explanations were given in the studies on reasons for nonadherence regarding treatment of negatives and referral.

Morbidity and mortality

Four trials assessed outcomes related to morbidity, mortality or both (Table 4), but all showed low quality evidence ( Figure 7) impairing firm conclusions. One study reported lower slide positivity rates during the RDT-based CCMm intervention period in comparison with presumptive CCMm in the pre-intervention period. However, besides changing to RDT-based diagnosis, the type of antimalarial drug used changed from sulphadoxinepyrimethamine to an ACT in this study [26]. Two other  studies showed beneficial effects of RDT-based CCMm but only compared it to areas with no CCMm [25,27]. In contrast, the perception of patients on morbidity did not improve with RDT-based CMMm. In a randomized, cross-over trial on RDT-based CCMm versus presumptive CCMm, a significant increased perception of disease recovery was found in the presumptively treated patients at day 7 compared with the intervention arm (97.3 versus 93.3%, p = 0.000). More patients were treated with antimalarials in the control group; however, in both the intervention and control group the perceived unrecovered patients harboured only few malaria positives (repeated testing at day 7), thus suggesting a possible bias in the subjective study outcome [24].

Community acceptance

Studies by Mukanga et al. [35] in Uganda and Nsagha et al. [36] in Cameroon assessed the opinion of community members before introducing an RDT-based CCMm intervention. In Mukanga et al. [35] presumptive CCMm was already implemented and a positive attitude towards the CHWs was present, due to their voluntary services, accessibility and the effectiveness of provided drugs. The change to CHWs using RDTs was therefore well received. In Nsagha et al. [36] all participants would welcome RDTs, but in this urban setting, where other healthcare providers are available, CHWs were not always considered to be the appropriate persons to carry out RDTs. Participants in both studies stressed that proper training of CHWs on RDT use was considered essential.
A few years later Mukanga et al. [37] asked community members in Uganda for their opinion after introduction of RDT-based CCMm; 79.4% thought CHWs' service was better after introduction of RDTs and 88.7% thought CHWs should continue to use RDTs. Support for a high acceptance was also found in Senegal, where community members mainly praised the increased access to malaria care [38]. Furthermore, in several studies participants welcomed RDTs since it made correct diagnosis possible at the village level, which saved money on transport [27,36,38].
Acceptability of diagnosis and treatment by CHWs was related to the outcome of the RDT. Only 5% of CHWs had problems persuading RDT-positive patients of a malaria diagnosis in Sudan [27]. This is supported by Mubi et al. [24], in which 97.4% of patients complied to prescribed treatment after a positive RDT. However, persuading patients that they did not have malaria was problematic for 20% of CHWs in case of negative test results [27], an issue that was already predicted by Mukanga et al. [35].
Adherence to referral advice by patients was reported in only two studies [33,39]. Chanda et al. [33] used a system in which CHWs were notified by health centre staff if a referred patient visited the health centre. For 40 to 42% of the referrals feedback was received. In contrast, Thomson et al. [39] found a very low referral completion of 1.5%. They surveyed children three to 59 months and pregnant women in their second and third trimester in Sierra Leone. A large variation in referral completion was found within the different communities (0 to 18.8%). Furthermore, if stratified for RDT results, referral completion was 88.2% for RDT positives (usually referred for signs of severe malaria) in contrast to 0.9% for RDT negatives. Barriers for adherence    mentioned in focus group discussions were bad roads [38], difficulties in transport [38], distance to health centre [33,38] and lack of staff at the health centre which may result in long waiting hours [33].

Uptake of RDT based CCMm by members of the community

Three studies reported on the uptake by the community of RDT-based CCMm in comparison to baseline levels (pre-intervention period), presumptive CCMm or health centre-based care (Table 5). Two studies showed an increased use of RDT-based CCMm services over the study period [15,27]. Additionally, one of the studies compared it to health centre-based care and showed a constant number of visits in these clinics. It was concluded that the overall access to malaria healthcare had thus increased by the intervention [15]. These positive findings are not always supported, as in a study of Lemma et al. [40], the number of people visiting the randomly selected CHWs who performed RDT-based CCMm was half of those visiting CHWs who used presumptive diagnosis. The reasons for this reduction were not further investigated. Obstacles for visiting the CHW mentioned by the community in three other studies were the unavailability of the CHW [16,37], dislike of CHW services [37], distrust of the skills of the CHWs [37], lack of drugs [37], fear of HIV/AIDs infection [35], a Hawkes [21] One day training. Pictorial job aid was provided.
100% of CHWs correctly interpreted the RDT directly after training.
Median score on a WHO 16-item assessment of RDT performance was 100% (range of 94-100%) directly after training.
Ndiaye [20] CHWs: one month theoretical training, one month practical training at health post. CMDs: 3-day theoretical training, 15 days practical training at health post.
-% CHWs and CMDs correctly performing the step, observed over two years.
(1) Surface clean and flat -87%
(2) Test opened just before use -100%
(3) Document patient name and date -83%
(4) Use of gloves -0%  99.0% 99.9% 7.6% * = correct treatment, ** = percentage of CHWs that relied on RDT results, *** = adherence percentages calculated from study data, **** = CHWs attended review meetings with study team each month discussing non-adherence to diagnostic and treatment algorithm with CHWs, HF = health facility, NS = not specified, AL = artemetherlumefantrine, SP = sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine, AS = artesunate, ACT = artemisinin-based combination therapy (not further specified), BF = Burkina Faso, Gh = Ghana, Ug = Uganda. Rutta [26] Pre-post study RDT-based CCMm (with AL)
Comparison with pre-intervention period (presumptive CCMm with SP)
A drop of >72.0% in malaria slide positivity rate to a persistent low level of <10% was observed in the study period.
Elmardi [27] Pre-post study RDT-based CCMm (with AS/SP).
Comparison with pre-intervention period (no CCMm, health centres treated with AS/SP) 24% fever cases in last two weeks pre-intervention and 8.5% fever cases post intervention (p = 0.000).
61 deaths (all <5 years) in the last season pre-implementation of intervention versus 1 death (>5 years) in the season post-implementation (p = 0.000).
disease that is perceived to be too severe for CHW to handle [16], and the relative distance to the health centre versus to the CHW [16,37].

Stock-outs

In the pre-intervention focus group discussions in the study of Mukanga et al. [35], problems in lack of transport for replenishment of supplies were foreseen. Four studies mentioned stock-out problems [18,20,33,38].
The only other study that mentioned supply issues did not experience any stock-out problems [27]. In all studies the CHW was instructed to replenish stocks at an affiliated health centre. Blanas et al. [38] found in 2009 that 74% of villages did not have RDTs or the RDTs were expired. In 68% of villages no ACT was available. However, Ndiaye et al. [20] found in the same study area in 2010 and 2011, that 90.2% of CHWs had RDTs in stock and 88% had sufficient ACT in stock. It seems that experience over time helped stock management, although in the latter study only 11.8% of all stock management forms were completed. Stock-out problems were also found in the studies of Chanda et al. [33] (stock-outs of RDTs for about two weeks) and Counihan et al. [18] (stock-outs of drugs and RDTs). One of the biggest problems for CHWs in the latter study was the refusal of health centres to resupply the CHWs. Health centres were either not informed about the agreement on stock supply or they experienced stock-outs themselves [18].

Motivation and remuneration of CHWs

Ndiaye et al. [20] showed that there was high seasonal variation in CHW participation in Senegal. This could be due to the difference in malaria burden but the authors also suspect that the little remuneration and the nearby gold mining activities had their impact on CHW participation. CHWs are mostly considered volunteers, but incentives such as small fees for their consultation [27], compensation in material form or services [16,17,23,29], or structured payments [17,24,26,30] were mentioned in most studies. In Elmardi et al. [27] only 35% of CHWs were satisfied with the financial outcome of their services which was 0.5 US$ per consultation. However, when these CHWs were asked about the most motivating aspect of their work, it was not the financial compensation but community respect and spiritual outcome. This was supported by Hamer et al. [17] in which only four of 18 CHWs received some kind of payment, but almost all were satisfied or highly satisfied with their CHW job (37 and 61%, respectively). There was no information on the impact of incentives and motivation on the attrition of CHWs.

Cost-effectiveness

Two studies on cost-effectiveness compared RDT-based CCMm to presumptive CCMm [21,22] and a third compared it with health centre-based malaria care [23] ( Table 6). All three studies did not have sufficient quality for cost-effectiveness analyses as described in risk of bias summary and all used a short-term outcome for health benefit, that is cost per correctly treated case [22,23], or related cost per case saved from unnecessary treatment [21]. Compared to health centre-based care, costs for RDTbased CCMm were lower per correctly treated case, but the additional cost per change in case appropriately diagnosed and treated was 4.18 US$ for RDT-based CCMm in Zambia [23]. RDT-based CCMm was also found to cost less compared with presumptive CCMm for areas with low to medium malaria transmission [22], but not in high transmission areas as was shown in the Democratic Republic of Congo [21]. Furthermore, study region could be of importance as shown by Lemma et al. [22] in Ethiopia. The study was situated in an area where Plasmodium vivax is also prevalent and consequently the RDT that differentiated between types of malaria species showed the lowest costs per appropriately treated case. However, for total costs, only differentiating between P. falciparum malaria and all other fever cases was the cheapest option.

Discussion

This review showed that CHWs are able to provide qualitative health care for malaria if properly trained. This is substantiated by other reviews for shared outcomes [5][6][7]. Nevertheless some barriers are present for the success of the intervention. The success and failure of each of the steps in CCMm is discussed below. Tayler-Smith [15] RDT-based CCMm free of charge Health centre care, little payment was required for ACT.
In two years there was an increase in number of episodes of treated malaria per child per year from 0.4 to 1.2 for CHWs, whereas it remained stable at 0.2 for health centres.
The high quality of care is reflected in the good sensitivity and specificity of RDTs used by CHWs compared with microscopy. A high sensitivity is needed because, as the new first line of health care, RDT-based CCMm cannot be inferior in detecting malaria cases to the existing practices in health centres in which microscopy is often used, especially because it seems that RDT negatives, including false negatives, may not always reach a health centre for additional care [33,39]. When the RDTs performed by CHWs were compared to PCR the sensitivity lowered but many of these cases were also missed by microscopy [29]. Furthermore, the clinical relevance of these low parasitaemia cases is being debated, because they are considered to be ubiquitous and usually asymptomatic, although it might cause anaemia [41]. Recent indications of a decreased malaria transmission in regions in SSA could however lead to lower levels of immunity in the population and might subsequently increase disease susceptibility, also for subjects with low parasitaemia levels [42]. RDT performance in case of low parasitaemia levels will therefore become increasingly important, especially in elimination settings.
Specificity levels were more variable, which is also seen in RDT use by professional health-care workers [43]. This is a potential threat to the success of CCMm as it could lead to overtreatment and missed diagnoses of other febrile illnesses. This could be a reason to promote the implementation of iCCM, as other serious causes of fever, such as pneumonia, will be detected with this intervention. Factors influencing specificity could be microscopy slide quality [24] and persistent circulating HRP2 antigens (the diagnostic target of P. falciparum RDTs) after clearance of the malaria infection [44]. The latter might explain a lower specificity when a substantial part of individuals received previous anti-malarial treatment [30] and the lower specificity for individuals with a higher immunity against malaria, such as children > five years of age in Ishengoma et al. [28] and in Chinkhumba et al. [30]. Another possibility for a low specificity, though controversial, could be that RDTs are more sensitive than microscopy, meaning that false positives were actually true positives [43]. Support for this conclusion may be found in Ratsimbasoa et al. who showed a higher specificity if RDTs were compared with PCR than if RDTs were compared with microscopy [29].
The performance of RDTs did not seem to be much influenced by execution and interpretation of RDTs, as these showed generally good results. It should however be considered that all results were collected by (in)direct evaluation of the CHWs and this may have biased the outcome [45]. Job aid and training were factors positively associated with interpretation and execution of RDTs, however, this improvement could also be related to the selection bias in CHWs. That would imply CHWs perform better with higher educational background. Nevertheless progress may still be obtained by increased practice of RDTs during training [18,19], especially practice of interpretation of faint positives and invalid test results and practice of the steps that were found to be frequently problematic; these were collecting blood in the right way and in the right amount, dispensing buffer drops in the right amount and in the right well, registering patient data and waiting the correct time before reading test results [18][19][20]. It is unknown why these steps were more problematic. Only one study reported an event with high safety risk [18], but safety issues should always be well addressed during training. Furthermore, visual impairments may hamper the correct interpretation of RDTs [34] and therefore screening for visual impairments should be done before appointing new CHWs.
RDT performance could also have been influenced by 1) storage conditions [46], which stresses the need of a cold chain, or 2) type of RDT, because of variable intrinsic diagnostic qualities and differences in ease of execution and interpretation. Many types of RDTs are available and not enough evidence was found in this review to advise on a specific type of test. Guidance for RDT choice can be found in a published WHO report which shows an extended overview of all different malaria RDTs, although it should be noted that these were tested in regulated circumstances by laboratory technicians, thus not informing on end-user impact [47]. Adherence to test results and referral guidelines is important for safe and successful implementation of RDTbased CCMm and the reviewed literature highlighted that CHWs showed generally high levels of adherence to test results regarding treatment. This in contrast to professional healthcare workers, in whom adherence was found to be much more variable because they often rely on clinical judgment instead of RDT results [48][49][50][51][52] and the fear of false-negative RDT results may tempt them to treat negative patients, especially in the case of subjects with no or little malaria immunity [53]. It could be that these reasons also contributed to the few studies on CHWs who reported non-adherence to negative test results [20,27,30], especially because CHWs were previously instructed to regard any fever case as malaria. This is however unknown since CHW reasons for not adhering to negative test results were not investigated, although several studies stressed the importance of training and monitoring in order for CHWs to adhere to the study guidelines [17,18,23,24,26,28,30,32,33,40]. Interestingly, all studies with an iCCM design showed good adherence to negative RDT results. The provided alternatives for malaria treatment in iCCM, such as antibiotic treatment for pneumonia after diagnosis with a respiratory rate timer, could have contributed positively to this adherence.
Unfortunately, despite the importance of referring patients with danger signs, adherence to referral policy is scarcely addressed, with one study reporting low [20] and one reporting high adherence [25]. Again, why CHWs did not refer patients was not studied. From the patient perspective, two studies investigated referral completion and showed that many patients did not follow up on referral, although the big difference in magnitude between these studies is remarkable [33,39]. Possible barriers for patients to complete referral were found to be mostly due to transportation difficulties; a problem that is even bigger for health centre-based care and one that is not easily solved, although iCCM could reduce the overall need for referral. Other barriers were not thoroughly investigated; however an interesting finding was that RDT result apparently influenced referral completion [39].
Studies on morbidity and mortality lacked high quality evidence which impairs firm conclusions. CCMm should be beneficial compared with presumptive CCMm by decreasing overtreatment, and increasing diagnoses of other diseases. However, false negative RDT results could negate the beneficial effects. The low evidence is surprising, but may reflect the more challenging design needed, which should incorporate follow-up of all patients.
The effect on morbidity and mortality in the total population is dependent on acceptability and healthcareseeking behaviour of the community, which was found to increase within the community after introduction of RDT-based CCMm. It should, however, be noted that the studies reporting on the uptake of CCMm with RDTs took place during a trial, which could influence the way people behave. This effect is better known as the Hawthorne effect [45]. Several aspects were mentioned as barriers of CCMm uptake in the reviewed studies. Even though CHWs are mostly selected by the community or community leaders and must often meet certain criteria of educational background, barriers related to distrust of the CHW are mentioned [37]. How often distrust is a problem and what this is based upon is unknown. Better understanding of distrust might help in correctly sensitizing the community to increase acceptance and uptake of CCMm. Other barriers are logistical factors such as distance and transport to CHW, unavailability of CHW and stock outs. As CCMm already brings malaria care closer to the patient's home, problems of distance and transport are not specific for community based healthcare and are difficult to solve. Unavailability of the CHW might be related to too little remuneration, limiting CHWs in their time because they must take care of their livelihood. CHW remuneration is shortly discussed below. The issue of stock-outs seems to be a frequent problem for RDTs and anti-malarial drugs [18,20,33,38]. Next to the failure to provide patients the care they need at these moments, even the rumour of stock-out could prevent people from visiting CHWs [37]. The problem might be even bigger after trial termination because stock supply is usually more strictly regulated during study periods. Experience with stock management by CHWs may have a positive influence on the availability [20], but stock management by CHWs is not always the main barrier [33]. CHWs usually rely on nearby health facilities for their stock supply but, due to financial, logistical, political, and other factors, drug supply through the government health systems is often unreliable and shortages of essential drugs are common in health centres as well, especially in the most remote areas [54].
Another issue important for sustainability of RDT-based CCMm is CHWs' motivation and remuneration. It is unfortunate that information is scarce and there is no evaluation of motivation and the remuneration alternatives on the subsequent retention of CHWs in RDTbased CCMm. However, respect by the community and spiritual outcomes seem to be important for motivation. This was also reported in a recent Cochrane review that informed on motivation for lay health workers involved in all types of healthcare interventions [55]. Altruism, social recognition, knowledge gain, and career development were mentioned as motivations. Discrepancies were found in opinions on payment as incentive; supporters thought their time investment and obtained skills should be compensated, opponents thought working in a profitoriented way can evoke negative reactions within the community [56]. Non-monetary incentives, such as bicycles, uniforms, mobile phones, or health insurance were generally well appreciated [56,57].
The last important item for long-term implementation, in particular for policy makers, is cost-effectiveness. Costeffectiveness is highly dependent on malaria transmission, infrastructure and existing health systems. It can be concluded from the reviewed literature that the possible monetary beneficial effects of RDT-based CCMm versus presumptive CCMm are the biggest in areas with low to moderate malaria prevalence, at least for the costs per correctly treated case. With declining malaria prevalence in many SSA countries, RDT-based CCMm will probably become increasingly cost-effective [58]. However, because of limitations in the study designs these cost-effectiveness analyses are not informative enough for policy makers. Most importantly not all health-related benefits were included, such as the effect on longer term morbidity and mortality. Also, the real-time information on malaria prevalence that can be obtained with RDT testing is of importance for malaria control programmes. Moreover, testing with RDTs enables CHWs to adequately treat other febrile diseases than malaria and is the first step in moving from CCMm to iCCM. Because of these additional benefits, cost-utility analyses on differences in disability or quality adjusted life years (DALYs or QALYs) would gain the most information on the actual effects for patients and the possible impact for society of RDT-based CCMm.
A number of limitations are present due to the scope of this review. First of all, for several outcomes only a few studies were found, limiting the amount of evidence. Moreover, the few studies found were sometimes of insufficient quality for the relevant outcome, such as for morbidity and mortality. In general, very few studies investigated the factors that could explain why some of the critical steps in CCMm are successful or not. Secondly, in contrast to outcomes of diagnostic quality, cost-effectiveness, or impact of intervention on morbidity or mortality, it was challenging to assess the risk of bias for the remaining outcomes, because criteria for quality assessment were not standardized. Thirdly, most outcomes were investigated in trial settings, in which logistics are frequently well arranged and motivation is high, but only until the end of the study period. The lack of implementation studies may therefore have caused a bias. Finally, the restriction of the review to CCMm prevented the use of studies on iCCM without distinguishable CCMm data, but this was the only way to establish the benefits and failures of the individual intervention for the fight against malaria. Nevertheless, integrated CCM is an important development that may lead to increased access to targeted healthcare, without jeopardizing but potentially even improving malaria care.
Although the data presented in this review give a wealth of information, several aspects warrant further studies. First of all, no firm conclusions can be made on the absolute impact of the test and treat policies on morbidity and mortality. Further studies appropriately designed to measure this effect are needed and should preferably include follow-up of all patients, including referred and RDTnegative patients to also estimate the change in detection of other febrile diseases. Proven effect on morbidity and mortality will help policy makers in their decision about implementation of the intervention. Furthermore, this review has shown that social science contributions are scarce. This limits the understanding of the implementation of RDT-based CCMm in different local contexts. Multidisciplinary approaches in which biomedical and social sciences asses the intervention, both by qualitative and quantitative methods, are needed. Factors influencing adherence to test results, referral completion, acceptance and uptake of the intervention and CHW attrition need to be more thoroughly investigated. Moreover, research is required to assess the best and most sustainable way of (re)training and supervising CHWs.
Little is published on logistic and structural elements, which would allow the design of a sustainable programme. Therefore, the system of stock supply and stock management throughout the healthcare system should be outlined and analysed to detect the problem areas.

Conclusions

Despite limitations of the currently available evidence, several recommendations can be made for the design and implementation of CCMm. It is most important that CHWs receive a training in which they have enough opportunity to practice the difficult steps and interpretation of RDTs to ensure adequate execution and interpretation of the tests and consequently ensure the most optimal test performance. Furthermore, the risks derived from potentially lower specificity may be outweighed if iCCM is implemented. A job aid, repeated training and supervision can subsequently enhance the overall performance of CHWs, including adherence to test results. Again, further improvement in adherence can be obtained by implementing iCCM. Community sensitization is needed to ensure comprehension of the intervention and trust in the skills of the CHW. Furthermore, it might stimulate adherence to treatment and referral advice. The stock management system needs to be elucidated and stock management training should be an integrated part in the CHW and health centre staff training.

Figure 1

1Flow chart of search strategy.

Figure 2

2Risk of bias summary for test performance. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 3

3Risk of bias summary for direct interpretation of RDT. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 4

4Risk of bias summary for interpretation of photographs. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 5

5Risk of bias summary for RDT execution. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 6

6Risk of bias summary for adherence. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 7

7Risk of bias summary for intervention studies on morbidity and mortality. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 8

8Risk of bias summary for cost-effectiveness studies. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 9

9Risk of bias summary for healthcare-seeking behaviour. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 10

10Forest plot of RDT performance when performed by CHWs (no subgroup analyses). Lemma 2011a = Paracheck Pf, Lemma 2011b = Parascreen pan/p.

Table 1

1RDT test performance by CHWsStudy 
Target population 
RDT type 
Reference 
standard (RS)
RS positive* (%) Sensitivity (%) Specificity (%)
Ratsimbasoa [29] >2 months (history of) fever 
CareStart 
PCR 
56.7% 
61.8% 
95%
Ratsimbasoa [29] >2 months (history of) fever 
CareStart 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS
37.2% 
95.9% 
87%
Chinkhumba [30] >5 years (history of) fever 
Bioline SD, First Response 
malaria, Paracheck PF
Microscopy of 
thick BS (expert)
38.5% 
95% 
43%
Chinkhumba [30]** >5 years (history of) fever 
Bioline SD 
Microscopy of 
thick BS (expert).
41% 
97% 
39%
Chinkhumba [30]** >5 years (history of) fever 
First response malaria 
Microscopy of 
thick BS (expert).
40% 
92% 
42%
Ishengoma [28] 
All ages, care seeking 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS.
20.8% 
88.6% 
88.2%
Ishengoma [28] 
< 5 years 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS
19.7% 
90.1% 
93.6%
Ishengoma [28] 
≥5 years 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS
21% 
88.3% 
86.5%
Ishengoma [28] 
No fever patients 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS
14.5% 
84.7% 
90.1%
Ishengoma [28] 
Fever patients 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS
33.9% 
92.2% 
82.9%
Lemma [22]** 
>3 months suspected of malaria Paracheck Pf 
Microscopy of 
thick BS.
18.7% 
88.7% 
94.2%
Lemma [22]** 
>3 months suspected of malaria Parascreen 
Microscopy of 
thick BS.
18.7% 
83.2% 
95.1%
Mubi [24] 
>3 months (history of) fever. 
Paracheck Pf 
Microscopy of 
thick BS.
22.6% 
85.3% 
59.8%
Premji [31] 
Children <42 months 
Parasight TM-F test 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS.
66.6% 
84% 
81%
Tiono [14] 
Children 6-59 months 
with (history of) fever.
FirstSign Malaria Pf 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS.
54.8% 
97.9% 
53.4%
Tiono [14] 
Children 6-59 months 
with (history of) fever. 
(High transmission)
FirstSign Malaria Pf 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS.
76.1% 
98% 
25.4%
Tiono [14] 
Children 6-59 months 
with (history of) fever. 
(Low transmission)
FirstSign Malaria Pf 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS.
31.8% 
97.6% 
63.7%
*P. falciparum, **Two types of RDTs separately tested.

Table 2

2Interpretation and execution of RDTs by CHWsStudy 
CHW training 
Outcome interpretation 
Outcome execution
Counihan [18] Half-day training. At 3 months CHWs 
received a poster-sized job aid and a 
photographic guide on RDT 
interpretation.
(I) RDT test results correctly read by 95.1, 
98.3 and 98.3% of the CHWs at 3, 6 and 
12 months after training respectively.
19-item checklist, interpretation included, 
8 items were considered critical.
(II) Correct interpretation of positive RDT 
results was 96.5% at 3 months, 98.3% at 
6 months and 90.5% at 12 months.
Median correctly performed critical steps 
were 87.5%, 100% and 100% at 3, 6 and 
12 months respectively.
(II) Correct interpretation of negative RDT 
results was 94.3% at 3 months, 97.9% at 
6 months and 94.7% at 12 months.
40.3, 61.7 and 79.7% of CHWs correctly 
performed critical RDT steps at 3, 6 and 
12 months respectively.
(II) Faint positive lines were correctly 
interpreted by 89.7% at 3 months, 96.7% 
at 6 months and declined to 76.7% at 
12 months.
Mukanga [32] 8-day training by experienced trainers. 
Job aid provided.
100% of the RDTs were correctly interpreted 
shortly after training (<2 weeks).
96.3% of RDTs were correctly performed 
shortly after training (<2 weeks) in a 
14-item checklist, interpretation excluded.
Harvey [19] 
Group 1: only use of manufacturers' 
instructions. Group 2: only use of 
job aid. Group 3: 3-hour training on 
RDTs + job aid.
(I) 72, 86 and 96% of CHWs correctly 
interpreted RDT results for group 1, 2 
and 3 respectively.
57% of steps, 80% of steps and 90% of 
steps were correctly performed by group 
1, 2 and 3 respectively at the same day of 
receiving instructions, job aid or training in 
a 16-item checklist, interpretation included. 
(II) 54, 82 and 93% of tests were correctly 
interpreted for group 1, 2 and 3 respectively.

Table 3

3Adherence to test results by CHWsStudy 
Target population 
Treatment Alternative 
Adherence 
overall*
Positives 
treated
Negatives 
treated
CCMm studies
Chanda [23,33] 
All ages, care seeking. 
AL, SP <5 kg Complicated malaria and non-malaria 
febrile cases were referred to HF.
99.9% 
99.3% 
0.2%
Chinkhumba [30] >5 years, (history of) fever 
NS 
Referral not mentioned. 
86.9% 
98% 
58%
Elmardi [27] 
NS 
AS/SP 
Complicated malaria and non-malaria 
febrile cases were referred to HF.
70%** 
NS 
NS
Ishengoma [28] 
≥5 years with (history of) fever 
AL 
Referral not specified. 
95.8% 
98.9% 
5.4%
Mubi [24] 
>3 months, (history of) fever. 
Exclusion: severe disease
AL 
Referral not specified. 
96.8% 
99.7% 
6.1%
Ndiaye [20]*** 
Patients of all ages, care seeking. 
NS 
CHW: referral of patients <2 months, 
RDT negatives, severe symptoms, 
suspected drug adverse events. CMD: 
referral of all cases excluding 
uncomplicated malaria cases.
88.6% 
92.0% 
20.3%
Ndiaye [20]*** 
Patients of all ages, care seeking. 
NS 
CHW: Referral of patients <2 months, 
RDT negatives, severe symptoms, 
suspected drug adverse events.
85.6% 
90.1% 
24.8%
Ndiaye [20]*** 
Patients of all ages, care seeking. 
NS 
CMD: Referral of all cases excluding 
uncomplicated malaria cases.
93.9% 
95.3% 
10.4%
iCCM studies
Hamer [17] & 
Yeboah-Antwi [16]
Children 6 months-5 years, fever. 
AL 
Children with danger signs were 
referred to HF.
99.3% 
98.5% 
0.4%
Mukanga [32] 
Children <5 (history of) fever 
no danger signs.
AL 
CHWs also diagnosed and treated 
pneumonia. No referral mentioned.
97.8% 
98.6% 
4.8%
Mukanga [34]**** BF: 6-59 months, (history of) fever AL 
Referral for severe disease and for 
non-responders at day 3 after CHW visit.
99.0% 
100% 
4.8%
Mukanga [34]**** Gh: 6-59 months, (history of) fever AA 
Referral for severe disease and for 
non-responders at day 3 after CHW visit.
99.5% 
100% 
3.3%
Mukanga [34]**** Ug: 4-59 months (history of) fever. AL 
Referral for severe disease and for 
non-responders at day 3 after CHW visit.

Table 4

4Morbidity and mortality outcomes of RDT based CCMm strategiesStudy 
Design 
Intervention 
Control 
Outcome
Mubi [24] 
RCT 
RDT-based CCMm Presumptive CCMm 
Increased perception of recovery in control group (97.3%) 
versus intervention group (93.3%) at day 7. P = 0.000
Two malaria related deaths, one in each arm.
Thiam [25] 
NRCT 
RDT-based CCMm No CCMm 
Malaria related hospitalizations decreased by 43.1% in 
intervention areas and 40.9% in control areas. Malaria 
attributed deaths decreased by 62.5% in intervention 
areas (significant decrease) and 23.4% in control areas 
(no significant decrease).

Table 5

5Healthcare-seeking behaviourStudy 
Intervention 
Control 
Outcome
Elmardi [27] 
RDT-based CCMm 
Comparison with pre-intervention 
period (no CCMm)
Pre-intervention 25% of mothers of sick children <5 years would 
seek care within the village, after the study 64.7% would seek care 
within the village (p value).
Lemma [40] 
RDT-based CCMm 
Presumptive CCMm 
Only half the number of patients (5,123 patients) visited CHWs who 
performed RDT-based CCMm compared with presumptive CCMm 
(10,475 patients).

Table 6


Background

Malaria affects over 300 million people every year, with around 90% of infections occurring in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) [1,2]. Community case management of malaria (CCMm), formerly known as home based management of malaria, is a strategy recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) which aims at reducing the malaria burden by improving early access to malaria directed healthcare [3]. It is based on treatment of malaria cases, mainly children, by community health workers (CHWs), within the community. Different cadres exist for CHWs, but all these individuals have in common that they are part of the community, they are not professional healthcare workers but receive a short training and often work on a voluntary basis or for small compensation (although in some countries they are included in the salaried healthcare system). While fever cases were previously treated presumptively with anti-malarials, CCMm programmes are now expected to follow the WHO recommendation to treat only malaria patients with confirmed diagnosis, usually with rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) [4]. It is expected that this will reduce unnecessary malaria treatment and increase correct diagnosis in patients suffering from other febrile illnesses. Three published reviews describe RDT use in CCMm, however, the issues discussed in these reviews are limited [5,6] and not all of the important literature was included [6], or CHWs were not distinguished from professional healthcare providers [7]. Systematically obtained information on the success or failure of critical steps in RDT-based CCMm is lacking, but is needed in order to show its value in malaria control programmes. Furthermore, the WHO currently advises to proceed to integrated community case management (iCCM) [8], which focuses on the diagnosis and treatment of multiple diseases such as malaria, pneumonia and diarrhoea, and lessons from CCMm should be used during this transition. This systematic review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the success or failure of critical steps in CCMm with rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs).

Methods


Search methodology

A systematic search was performed in the databases of Medline, Embase, the Cochrane Library and the library of the 'Malaria in Pregnancy' consortium (MIP consortium). Web of Science was used to search for missed relevant studies in references and citing articles. The databases were last searched on October 12, 2013. Synonyms for 'malaria' , 'RDT' and 'CHW' were combined to find all relevant studies. For the complete search syntax see Additional file 1.

Selection of studies

After removal of duplicates, title and abstract of articles were screened for in-and exclusion criteria by two independent readers (ER and PFM). A second screening was performed on full text articles. Discrepant results were resolved by discussion until a unanimous decision was reached. Criteria for inclusion were: original studies on RDT-based CCMm performed by CHWs defined as non-professional healthcare workers working within a community, studies on Plasmodium falciparum malaria, studies on one of the following critical steps: test performance by CHWs, execution of test, test interpretation, adherence to test results by CHWs, effect on morbidity and mortality, adherence to test results by patients, referral completion, social acceptance, community uptake, stock-outs, CHW incentives and motivation and cost-effectiveness. Exclusion criteria were: studies on iCMM in which the individual effect of RDT-based CCMm on the outcome cannot be identified and studies outside SSA. The focus on SSA was chosen because of the specific malaria epidemiology with a high burden of P. falciparum malaria and high morbidity and mortality rates [9]. Authors of relevant conference abstracts were contacted for more detailed results and information on methodology; in case of no additional information, no response, or if full study details did not meet in-or exclusion criteria, these abstracts were excluded.

Data extraction

Data were extracted from included studies by two independent readers (ER and PFM) and additionally for social-behavioural themes by SD and KPG. Critical appraisal was done in Review Manager [10] for intervention and diagnostic studies. Evers checklist was used for studies on cost-effectiveness according to Cochrane advice [11]. For all other studies, criteria are not well defined in literature, so criteria were defined per outcome. No studies were discarded based on qualitative assessment. If possible, separate data for CCMm from studies on integrated CCM (iCCM) were extracted.

Analysis

A forest plot was created of the RDT test characteristics by the use of Review Manager. No meta-analysis was performed due to heterogeneity of study characteristics and outcomes. The same heterogeneity accounts for adherence to test results. For the analysis of social-behavioural themes, NVivo Software for qualitative data analysis (QSR International Pty Ltd Cardigan, UK) was used.

Results


Search results

In total, 295 articles were found, of which 293 were by database searching and two via other sources. The latter articles were found after e-mail contact with authors of two abstracts [12,13]. Both referred to an article that could not be found in any of the databases [14,15]. After removal of duplications and after the screening steps on inclusion and exclusion criteria 27 articles remained for data extraction ( Figure 1). Exact reasons for exclusion of full text articles can be found in Additional file 2. One article [16] provided the same outcome information as another [17] (based on the same study) and is, therefore, not separately discussed.
In Additional file 3, an overview of the included studies is presented and for each of the critical steps the number of articles and relevant articles are indicated. Most of the articles were published between 2008 and 2013.

Risk of bias summary

Risk of bias was assessed for each study for every outcome (Figures 2,3,4,5,6,7,8 and 9). Nearly all studies on RDT performance showed low risks of bias. The same accounted for RDT execution, although Counihan et al. [18] sometimes used non-febrile volunteers instead of patients for RDT observations and Harvey et al. [19] showed baseline differences in the groups of CHWs. Adherence to test results showed little bias, although it was often unclear how studies collected data. One study on adherence showed a possible patient selection bias because a large group of malaria-suspected patients was not tested at all [20]. More variable quality was found in studies on interpretation, healthcare-seeking behaviour, stock-outs and cost-effectiveness. In all three cost-effectiveness studies, debatable assumptions were made: sensitivity and specificity used for calculations were derived from studies on professional healthcare workers instead of CHWs [21][22][23]. Furthermore, in two cost-effectiveness analyses adherence to test results was assumed to be 100% [21,22]. High risk of bias was seen for all studies concerning morbidity and mortality; none met the preferred intervention design of a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial (RCT). At the same time, blinding patients and CHWs is impossible for this type of intervention. It is therefore unfortunate that the one study that described a non-blinded cluster RCT used a subjective outcome measure (patients' reporting of clinical recovery), potentially introducing bias [24]. The other studies were either not randomized [25], or were single-armed, pre-and post-intervention studies [26,27]. It should be noted that studies that showed high risk of bias for a certain outcome did not necessarily show high risk of bias for their main objective.

RDT performance when used by CHWs

Sensitivity and specificity of RDTs when performed by CHWs was assessed in seven studies ( Figure 10 and Table 1). Studies differed in participants, malaria transmission and RDT type used. Sensitivities ranged between 83.2 and 97.9% if RDTs were compared with microscopy as reference standard. Ishengoma et al. found that the sensitivity was significantly higher for cases < five years of age and for fever cases [28]. Sensitivity decreased with decreasing malaria transmission over the years in this study [28], but this was not confirmed in Tiono et al. [14]. Ratsimbasoa et al. additionally calculated RDT sensitivity with PCR as reference standard (RS) and found a sensitivity of 61.8% [29].
The specificity of RDTs in the hands of CHWs was found to be more variable than the sensitivity, ranging from 39% in the study of Chinkhumba et al. [30] to 95.1% in the study of Lemma et al. [22]. In Chinkhumba et al. [30] patients who self-treated with anti-malarials (2-8% in previous two weeks) were not excluded and this was associated with a lower specificity. Mubi et al. [24] also showed low specificity, but it was mentioned that the microscopy slides were of poor quality, possibly impairing the detection of parasites in actual true positive samples. Slide quality was not mentioned in Tiono et al. [14], who found a low specificity, especially in the high transmission season (25.4%). The conditions for RDT storage were appropriate and the authors mainly related the results to persistent circulating antigens [14]. In Ishengoma et al. a higher specificity for children < five years of age was shown compared with older patients [28].

RDT interpretation

RDT interpretation was assessed by either direct assessment of RDTs (five studies) or by photographic assessment (two studies) (see Table 2). Correct interpretation was high for the direct assessment of RDTs; 96 to 100% of tests and 95.1 to 100% of CHWs, provided that CHWs were trained properly [18,19,21,32]. In photographic assessments, which have the inherent risk of selection bias as the number of ambiguous tests is relatively high, well-trained CHWs also scored high numbers of correctly interpreted tests, although more mistakes were made in reading faint positive and invalid tests [18,19]. The importance of training was shown for direct interpretation of RDTs as well as for photographic assessment in Harvey et al. [19]. In both assessments correct interpretation was lowest for CHWs who used only manufacturer's instructions, better for CHWs who used a job aid and the best for CHWs who used a job aid and received three hours' training. Unfortunately, a risk of selection bias was present because CHWs were not randomly selected and completion of secondary education was 6, 19 and 35%, respectively. Some indications were also found for the beneficial effect of repetitive execution of RDTs. In Harvey et al. improvement was seen with each successive RDT, although these data were not  presented [19]. Improvement over time was also presented by Counihan et al. [18]; the percentage of CHWs correctly interpreting RDT results from patients or volunteers at three, six and 12 months after training was 95.1, 98.3 and 98.3%, respectively. In contrast, this was not the case with the ten-item photographic assessment in which four CHWs consistently showed poor interpretation.

Execution of RDTs

Execution of RDTs was investigated in five studies that used non-uniform outcome variables (see Table 2). The way CHWs executed RDTs was judged on several items, but differences in number and definition of items further impaired comparison [18][19][20][21]32]. Nevertheless CHWs were found to correctly conduct RDTs if properly trained; 90 to 100% of steps were successfully executed in two studies that used the same WHO checklist, Hawkes et al. [21] and Harvey et al. [19]. In contrast, untrained CHWs that used only manufacturer's instructions or a job aid were found to respectively conduct only 57 and 80% of steps correctly in Harvey et al. [19]. The assessment of each individual executed step in this study showed that problems were found in dispensing buffer drops, waiting correct amount of time, pricking side of finger, blood collection and recording result in register. Counihan et al. [18], who assessed only the execution of eight RDT steps (see Additional file 4) that were considered critical for diagnosis or safety, showed improvement over time: 40.3, 61.7 and 79.7% of CHWs correctly performed critical steps at three, six and 12 months, respectively. Problematic steps were writing patient's name on cassette, recording results in register, usage of the blood collection loop, reading the test result in the right time and disposing non-sharps in non-sharps container [18][19][20]. Why these steps were problematic was not studied. No specific studies were done that looked at safety issues while performing RDTs but some included particular findings. Ndiaye et al. [20] observed that 0% of CHWs used gloves, but this was partly due to stock problems. In contrast, high levels of glove use were reported in Counihan et al. [18] (100% of CHWs after 12 months) and Harvey et al. [19] (96% in the group of trained CHWs). In Counihan et al. [18] an observer had to intervene once because a CHW was about to re-use a lancet on a new patient.

Adherence to test results and referral guidelines by CHWs

In general almost all patients (>90.0%) with positive RDTs were provided with anti-malarial drugs by CHWs ( Table 3). The percentage of patients with negative RDTs who, contradictory to the guidelines, still received antimalarial treatment was more variable, ranging from 0.2 to 58%. Six studies showed levels <10%, including all  iCCM studies, while two studies showed outliers of 20.3% [20] and 58% [30] of negative-tested patients that were treated. One other study presented the percentage of CHWs adhering to test results and showed that 30% of them treated negative-tested patients based on clinical judgment rather than RDT result; this was not related to previous experience in malaria management or educational background [27]. Ndiaye et al. [20] showed that the adherence was related to the type of care providers in their study. Community medicine distributors (CMDs) were only trained on RDT-based malaria management, while CHWs were attributed more health intervention tasks. CHWs gave artemisinin-combination therapy (ACT) to 24.8% of RDT negatives, while CMDs gave ACT to 10.4% of RDT negatives. Besides treating a high number of negative patients, CHWs also treated 22.3% of patients with ACT who were not tested at all, while for CMDs this was only 0.8%. Furthermore, CHWs and CMDs did not comply with the referral policy; referral rates from patient groups that should have been referred ranged from 18.2 to 47.1% with the lowest referral rates found for babies < two months of age and patients with severe symptoms. The only other study reporting on referral by CHWs showed better results, in the first year, 79.5% of RDT negatives were referred according to protocol and in the second year this had increased to 97.4% [25]. No explanations were given in the studies on reasons for nonadherence regarding treatment of negatives and referral.

Morbidity and mortality

Four trials assessed outcomes related to morbidity, mortality or both (Table 4), but all showed low quality evidence ( Figure 7) impairing firm conclusions. One study reported lower slide positivity rates during the RDT-based CCMm intervention period in comparison with presumptive CCMm in the pre-intervention period. However, besides changing to RDT-based diagnosis, the type of antimalarial drug used changed from sulphadoxinepyrimethamine to an ACT in this study [26]. Two other  studies showed beneficial effects of RDT-based CCMm but only compared it to areas with no CCMm [25,27]. In contrast, the perception of patients on morbidity did not improve with RDT-based CMMm. In a randomized, cross-over trial on RDT-based CCMm versus presumptive CCMm, a significant increased perception of disease recovery was found in the presumptively treated patients at day 7 compared with the intervention arm (97.3 versus 93.3%, p = 0.000). More patients were treated with antimalarials in the control group; however, in both the intervention and control group the perceived unrecovered patients harboured only few malaria positives (repeated testing at day 7), thus suggesting a possible bias in the subjective study outcome [24].

Community acceptance

Studies by Mukanga et al. [35] in Uganda and Nsagha et al. [36] in Cameroon assessed the opinion of community members before introducing an RDT-based CCMm intervention. In Mukanga et al. [35] presumptive CCMm was already implemented and a positive attitude towards the CHWs was present, due to their voluntary services, accessibility and the effectiveness of provided drugs. The change to CHWs using RDTs was therefore well received. In Nsagha et al. [36] all participants would welcome RDTs, but in this urban setting, where other healthcare providers are available, CHWs were not always considered to be the appropriate persons to carry out RDTs. Participants in both studies stressed that proper training of CHWs on RDT use was considered essential.
A few years later Mukanga et al. [37] asked community members in Uganda for their opinion after introduction of RDT-based CCMm; 79.4% thought CHWs' service was better after introduction of RDTs and 88.7% thought CHWs should continue to use RDTs. Support for a high acceptance was also found in Senegal, where community members mainly praised the increased access to malaria care [38]. Furthermore, in several studies participants welcomed RDTs since it made correct diagnosis possible at the village level, which saved money on transport [27,36,38].
Acceptability of diagnosis and treatment by CHWs was related to the outcome of the RDT. Only 5% of CHWs had problems persuading RDT-positive patients of a malaria diagnosis in Sudan [27]. This is supported by Mubi et al. [24], in which 97.4% of patients complied to prescribed treatment after a positive RDT. However, persuading patients that they did not have malaria was problematic for 20% of CHWs in case of negative test results [27], an issue that was already predicted by Mukanga et al. [35].
Adherence to referral advice by patients was reported in only two studies [33,39]. Chanda et al. [33] used a system in which CHWs were notified by health centre staff if a referred patient visited the health centre. For 40 to 42% of the referrals feedback was received. In contrast, Thomson et al. [39] found a very low referral completion of 1.5%. They surveyed children three to 59 months and pregnant women in their second and third trimester in Sierra Leone. A large variation in referral completion was found within the different communities (0 to 18.8%). Furthermore, if stratified for RDT results, referral completion was 88.2% for RDT positives (usually referred for signs of severe malaria) in contrast to 0.9% for RDT negatives. Barriers for adherence    mentioned in focus group discussions were bad roads [38], difficulties in transport [38], distance to health centre [33,38] and lack of staff at the health centre which may result in long waiting hours [33].

Uptake of RDT based CCMm by members of the community

Three studies reported on the uptake by the community of RDT-based CCMm in comparison to baseline levels (pre-intervention period), presumptive CCMm or health centre-based care (Table 5). Two studies showed an increased use of RDT-based CCMm services over the study period [15,27]. Additionally, one of the studies compared it to health centre-based care and showed a constant number of visits in these clinics. It was concluded that the overall access to malaria healthcare had thus increased by the intervention [15]. These positive findings are not always supported, as in a study of Lemma et al. [40], the number of people visiting the randomly selected CHWs who performed RDT-based CCMm was half of those visiting CHWs who used presumptive diagnosis. The reasons for this reduction were not further investigated. Obstacles for visiting the CHW mentioned by the community in three other studies were the unavailability of the CHW [16,37], dislike of CHW services [37], distrust of the skills of the CHWs [37], lack of drugs [37], fear of HIV/AIDs infection [35], a Hawkes [21] One day training. Pictorial job aid was provided.
100% of CHWs correctly interpreted the RDT directly after training.
Median score on a WHO 16-item assessment of RDT performance was 100% (range of 94-100%) directly after training.
Ndiaye [20] CHWs: one month theoretical training, one month practical training at health post. CMDs: 3-day theoretical training, 15 days practical training at health post.
-% CHWs and CMDs correctly performing the step, observed over two years.
(1) Surface clean and flat -87%
(2) Test opened just before use -100%
(3) Document patient name and date -83%
(4) Use of gloves -0%  99.0% 99.9% 7.6% * = correct treatment, ** = percentage of CHWs that relied on RDT results, *** = adherence percentages calculated from study data, **** = CHWs attended review meetings with study team each month discussing non-adherence to diagnostic and treatment algorithm with CHWs, HF = health facility, NS = not specified, AL = artemetherlumefantrine, SP = sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine, AS = artesunate, ACT = artemisinin-based combination therapy (not further specified), BF = Burkina Faso, Gh = Ghana, Ug = Uganda. Rutta [26] Pre-post study RDT-based CCMm (with AL)
Comparison with pre-intervention period (presumptive CCMm with SP)
A drop of >72.0% in malaria slide positivity rate to a persistent low level of <10% was observed in the study period.
Elmardi [27] Pre-post study RDT-based CCMm (with AS/SP).
Comparison with pre-intervention period (no CCMm, health centres treated with AS/SP) 24% fever cases in last two weeks pre-intervention and 8.5% fever cases post intervention (p = 0.000).
61 deaths (all <5 years) in the last season pre-implementation of intervention versus 1 death (>5 years) in the season post-implementation (p = 0.000).
disease that is perceived to be too severe for CHW to handle [16], and the relative distance to the health centre versus to the CHW [16,37].

Stock-outs

In the pre-intervention focus group discussions in the study of Mukanga et al. [35], problems in lack of transport for replenishment of supplies were foreseen. Four studies mentioned stock-out problems [18,20,33,38].
The only other study that mentioned supply issues did not experience any stock-out problems [27]. In all studies the CHW was instructed to replenish stocks at an affiliated health centre. Blanas et al. [38] found in 2009 that 74% of villages did not have RDTs or the RDTs were expired. In 68% of villages no ACT was available. However, Ndiaye et al. [20] found in the same study area in 2010 and 2011, that 90.2% of CHWs had RDTs in stock and 88% had sufficient ACT in stock. It seems that experience over time helped stock management, although in the latter study only 11.8% of all stock management forms were completed. Stock-out problems were also found in the studies of Chanda et al. [33] (stock-outs of RDTs for about two weeks) and Counihan et al. [18] (stock-outs of drugs and RDTs). One of the biggest problems for CHWs in the latter study was the refusal of health centres to resupply the CHWs. Health centres were either not informed about the agreement on stock supply or they experienced stock-outs themselves [18].

Motivation and remuneration of CHWs

Ndiaye et al. [20] showed that there was high seasonal variation in CHW participation in Senegal. This could be due to the difference in malaria burden but the authors also suspect that the little remuneration and the nearby gold mining activities had their impact on CHW participation. CHWs are mostly considered volunteers, but incentives such as small fees for their consultation [27], compensation in material form or services [16,17,23,29], or structured payments [17,24,26,30] were mentioned in most studies. In Elmardi et al. [27] only 35% of CHWs were satisfied with the financial outcome of their services which was 0.5 US$ per consultation. However, when these CHWs were asked about the most motivating aspect of their work, it was not the financial compensation but community respect and spiritual outcome. This was supported by Hamer et al. [17] in which only four of 18 CHWs received some kind of payment, but almost all were satisfied or highly satisfied with their CHW job (37 and 61%, respectively). There was no information on the impact of incentives and motivation on the attrition of CHWs.

Cost-effectiveness

Two studies on cost-effectiveness compared RDT-based CCMm to presumptive CCMm [21,22] and a third compared it with health centre-based malaria care [23] ( Table 6). All three studies did not have sufficient quality for cost-effectiveness analyses as described in risk of bias summary and all used a short-term outcome for health benefit, that is cost per correctly treated case [22,23], or related cost per case saved from unnecessary treatment [21]. Compared to health centre-based care, costs for RDTbased CCMm were lower per correctly treated case, but the additional cost per change in case appropriately diagnosed and treated was 4.18 US$ for RDT-based CCMm in Zambia [23]. RDT-based CCMm was also found to cost less compared with presumptive CCMm for areas with low to medium malaria transmission [22], but not in high transmission areas as was shown in the Democratic Republic of Congo [21]. Furthermore, study region could be of importance as shown by Lemma et al. [22] in Ethiopia. The study was situated in an area where Plasmodium vivax is also prevalent and consequently the RDT that differentiated between types of malaria species showed the lowest costs per appropriately treated case. However, for total costs, only differentiating between P. falciparum malaria and all other fever cases was the cheapest option.

Discussion

This review showed that CHWs are able to provide qualitative health care for malaria if properly trained. This is substantiated by other reviews for shared outcomes [5][6][7]. Nevertheless some barriers are present for the success of the intervention. The success and failure of each of the steps in CCMm is discussed below. Tayler-Smith [15] RDT-based CCMm free of charge Health centre care, little payment was required for ACT.
In two years there was an increase in number of episodes of treated malaria per child per year from 0.4 to 1.2 for CHWs, whereas it remained stable at 0.2 for health centres.
The high quality of care is reflected in the good sensitivity and specificity of RDTs used by CHWs compared with microscopy. A high sensitivity is needed because, as the new first line of health care, RDT-based CCMm cannot be inferior in detecting malaria cases to the existing practices in health centres in which microscopy is often used, especially because it seems that RDT negatives, including false negatives, may not always reach a health centre for additional care [33,39]. When the RDTs performed by CHWs were compared to PCR the sensitivity lowered but many of these cases were also missed by microscopy [29]. Furthermore, the clinical relevance of these low parasitaemia cases is being debated, because they are considered to be ubiquitous and usually asymptomatic, although it might cause anaemia [41]. Recent indications of a decreased malaria transmission in regions in SSA could however lead to lower levels of immunity in the population and might subsequently increase disease susceptibility, also for subjects with low parasitaemia levels [42]. RDT performance in case of low parasitaemia levels will therefore become increasingly important, especially in elimination settings.
Specificity levels were more variable, which is also seen in RDT use by professional health-care workers [43]. This is a potential threat to the success of CCMm as it could lead to overtreatment and missed diagnoses of other febrile illnesses. This could be a reason to promote the implementation of iCCM, as other serious causes of fever, such as pneumonia, will be detected with this intervention. Factors influencing specificity could be microscopy slide quality [24] and persistent circulating HRP2 antigens (the diagnostic target of P. falciparum RDTs) after clearance of the malaria infection [44]. The latter might explain a lower specificity when a substantial part of individuals received previous anti-malarial treatment [30] and the lower specificity for individuals with a higher immunity against malaria, such as children > five years of age in Ishengoma et al. [28] and in Chinkhumba et al. [30]. Another possibility for a low specificity, though controversial, could be that RDTs are more sensitive than microscopy, meaning that false positives were actually true positives [43]. Support for this conclusion may be found in Ratsimbasoa et al. who showed a higher specificity if RDTs were compared with PCR than if RDTs were compared with microscopy [29].
The performance of RDTs did not seem to be much influenced by execution and interpretation of RDTs, as these showed generally good results. It should however be considered that all results were collected by (in)direct evaluation of the CHWs and this may have biased the outcome [45]. Job aid and training were factors positively associated with interpretation and execution of RDTs, however, this improvement could also be related to the selection bias in CHWs. That would imply CHWs perform better with higher educational background. Nevertheless progress may still be obtained by increased practice of RDTs during training [18,19], especially practice of interpretation of faint positives and invalid test results and practice of the steps that were found to be frequently problematic; these were collecting blood in the right way and in the right amount, dispensing buffer drops in the right amount and in the right well, registering patient data and waiting the correct time before reading test results [18][19][20]. It is unknown why these steps were more problematic. Only one study reported an event with high safety risk [18], but safety issues should always be well addressed during training. Furthermore, visual impairments may hamper the correct interpretation of RDTs [34] and therefore screening for visual impairments should be done before appointing new CHWs.
RDT performance could also have been influenced by 1) storage conditions [46], which stresses the need of a cold chain, or 2) type of RDT, because of variable intrinsic diagnostic qualities and differences in ease of execution and interpretation. Many types of RDTs are available and not enough evidence was found in this review to advise on a specific type of test. Guidance for RDT choice can be found in a published WHO report which shows an extended overview of all different malaria RDTs, although it should be noted that these were tested in regulated circumstances by laboratory technicians, thus not informing on end-user impact [47]. Adherence to test results and referral guidelines is important for safe and successful implementation of RDTbased CCMm and the reviewed literature highlighted that CHWs showed generally high levels of adherence to test results regarding treatment. This in contrast to professional healthcare workers, in whom adherence was found to be much more variable because they often rely on clinical judgment instead of RDT results [48][49][50][51][52] and the fear of false-negative RDT results may tempt them to treat negative patients, especially in the case of subjects with no or little malaria immunity [53]. It could be that these reasons also contributed to the few studies on CHWs who reported non-adherence to negative test results [20,27,30], especially because CHWs were previously instructed to regard any fever case as malaria. This is however unknown since CHW reasons for not adhering to negative test results were not investigated, although several studies stressed the importance of training and monitoring in order for CHWs to adhere to the study guidelines [17,18,23,24,26,28,30,32,33,40]. Interestingly, all studies with an iCCM design showed good adherence to negative RDT results. The provided alternatives for malaria treatment in iCCM, such as antibiotic treatment for pneumonia after diagnosis with a respiratory rate timer, could have contributed positively to this adherence.
Unfortunately, despite the importance of referring patients with danger signs, adherence to referral policy is scarcely addressed, with one study reporting low [20] and one reporting high adherence [25]. Again, why CHWs did not refer patients was not studied. From the patient perspective, two studies investigated referral completion and showed that many patients did not follow up on referral, although the big difference in magnitude between these studies is remarkable [33,39]. Possible barriers for patients to complete referral were found to be mostly due to transportation difficulties; a problem that is even bigger for health centre-based care and one that is not easily solved, although iCCM could reduce the overall need for referral. Other barriers were not thoroughly investigated; however an interesting finding was that RDT result apparently influenced referral completion [39].
Studies on morbidity and mortality lacked high quality evidence which impairs firm conclusions. CCMm should be beneficial compared with presumptive CCMm by decreasing overtreatment, and increasing diagnoses of other diseases. However, false negative RDT results could negate the beneficial effects. The low evidence is surprising, but may reflect the more challenging design needed, which should incorporate follow-up of all patients.
The effect on morbidity and mortality in the total population is dependent on acceptability and healthcareseeking behaviour of the community, which was found to increase within the community after introduction of RDT-based CCMm. It should, however, be noted that the studies reporting on the uptake of CCMm with RDTs took place during a trial, which could influence the way people behave. This effect is better known as the Hawthorne effect [45]. Several aspects were mentioned as barriers of CCMm uptake in the reviewed studies. Even though CHWs are mostly selected by the community or community leaders and must often meet certain criteria of educational background, barriers related to distrust of the CHW are mentioned [37]. How often distrust is a problem and what this is based upon is unknown. Better understanding of distrust might help in correctly sensitizing the community to increase acceptance and uptake of CCMm. Other barriers are logistical factors such as distance and transport to CHW, unavailability of CHW and stock outs. As CCMm already brings malaria care closer to the patient's home, problems of distance and transport are not specific for community based healthcare and are difficult to solve. Unavailability of the CHW might be related to too little remuneration, limiting CHWs in their time because they must take care of their livelihood. CHW remuneration is shortly discussed below. The issue of stock-outs seems to be a frequent problem for RDTs and anti-malarial drugs [18,20,33,38]. Next to the failure to provide patients the care they need at these moments, even the rumour of stock-out could prevent people from visiting CHWs [37]. The problem might be even bigger after trial termination because stock supply is usually more strictly regulated during study periods. Experience with stock management by CHWs may have a positive influence on the availability [20], but stock management by CHWs is not always the main barrier [33]. CHWs usually rely on nearby health facilities for their stock supply but, due to financial, logistical, political, and other factors, drug supply through the government health systems is often unreliable and shortages of essential drugs are common in health centres as well, especially in the most remote areas [54].
Another issue important for sustainability of RDT-based CCMm is CHWs' motivation and remuneration. It is unfortunate that information is scarce and there is no evaluation of motivation and the remuneration alternatives on the subsequent retention of CHWs in RDTbased CCMm. However, respect by the community and spiritual outcomes seem to be important for motivation. This was also reported in a recent Cochrane review that informed on motivation for lay health workers involved in all types of healthcare interventions [55]. Altruism, social recognition, knowledge gain, and career development were mentioned as motivations. Discrepancies were found in opinions on payment as incentive; supporters thought their time investment and obtained skills should be compensated, opponents thought working in a profitoriented way can evoke negative reactions within the community [56]. Non-monetary incentives, such as bicycles, uniforms, mobile phones, or health insurance were generally well appreciated [56,57].
The last important item for long-term implementation, in particular for policy makers, is cost-effectiveness. Costeffectiveness is highly dependent on malaria transmission, infrastructure and existing health systems. It can be concluded from the reviewed literature that the possible monetary beneficial effects of RDT-based CCMm versus presumptive CCMm are the biggest in areas with low to moderate malaria prevalence, at least for the costs per correctly treated case. With declining malaria prevalence in many SSA countries, RDT-based CCMm will probably become increasingly cost-effective [58]. However, because of limitations in the study designs these cost-effectiveness analyses are not informative enough for policy makers. Most importantly not all health-related benefits were included, such as the effect on longer term morbidity and mortality. Also, the real-time information on malaria prevalence that can be obtained with RDT testing is of importance for malaria control programmes. Moreover, testing with RDTs enables CHWs to adequately treat other febrile diseases than malaria and is the first step in moving from CCMm to iCCM. Because of these additional benefits, cost-utility analyses on differences in disability or quality adjusted life years (DALYs or QALYs) would gain the most information on the actual effects for patients and the possible impact for society of RDT-based CCMm.
A number of limitations are present due to the scope of this review. First of all, for several outcomes only a few studies were found, limiting the amount of evidence. Moreover, the few studies found were sometimes of insufficient quality for the relevant outcome, such as for morbidity and mortality. In general, very few studies investigated the factors that could explain why some of the critical steps in CCMm are successful or not. Secondly, in contrast to outcomes of diagnostic quality, cost-effectiveness, or impact of intervention on morbidity or mortality, it was challenging to assess the risk of bias for the remaining outcomes, because criteria for quality assessment were not standardized. Thirdly, most outcomes were investigated in trial settings, in which logistics are frequently well arranged and motivation is high, but only until the end of the study period. The lack of implementation studies may therefore have caused a bias. Finally, the restriction of the review to CCMm prevented the use of studies on iCCM without distinguishable CCMm data, but this was the only way to establish the benefits and failures of the individual intervention for the fight against malaria. Nevertheless, integrated CCM is an important development that may lead to increased access to targeted healthcare, without jeopardizing but potentially even improving malaria care.
Although the data presented in this review give a wealth of information, several aspects warrant further studies. First of all, no firm conclusions can be made on the absolute impact of the test and treat policies on morbidity and mortality. Further studies appropriately designed to measure this effect are needed and should preferably include follow-up of all patients, including referred and RDTnegative patients to also estimate the change in detection of other febrile diseases. Proven effect on morbidity and mortality will help policy makers in their decision about implementation of the intervention. Furthermore, this review has shown that social science contributions are scarce. This limits the understanding of the implementation of RDT-based CCMm in different local contexts. Multidisciplinary approaches in which biomedical and social sciences asses the intervention, both by qualitative and quantitative methods, are needed. Factors influencing adherence to test results, referral completion, acceptance and uptake of the intervention and CHW attrition need to be more thoroughly investigated. Moreover, research is required to assess the best and most sustainable way of (re)training and supervising CHWs.
Little is published on logistic and structural elements, which would allow the design of a sustainable programme. Therefore, the system of stock supply and stock management throughout the healthcare system should be outlined and analysed to detect the problem areas.

Conclusions

Despite limitations of the currently available evidence, several recommendations can be made for the design and implementation of CCMm. It is most important that CHWs receive a training in which they have enough opportunity to practice the difficult steps and interpretation of RDTs to ensure adequate execution and interpretation of the tests and consequently ensure the most optimal test performance. Furthermore, the risks derived from potentially lower specificity may be outweighed if iCCM is implemented. A job aid, repeated training and supervision can subsequently enhance the overall performance of CHWs, including adherence to test results. Again, further improvement in adherence can be obtained by implementing iCCM. Community sensitization is needed to ensure comprehension of the intervention and trust in the skills of the CHW. Furthermore, it might stimulate adherence to treatment and referral advice. The stock management system needs to be elucidated and stock management training should be an integrated part in the CHW and health centre staff training.

Figure 1

1Flow chart of search strategy.

Figure 2

2Risk of bias summary for test performance. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 3

3Risk of bias summary for direct interpretation of RDT. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 4

4Risk of bias summary for interpretation of photographs. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 5

5Risk of bias summary for RDT execution. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 6

6Risk of bias summary for adherence. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 7

7Risk of bias summary for intervention studies on morbidity and mortality. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 8

8Risk of bias summary for cost-effectiveness studies. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 9

9Risk of bias summary for healthcare-seeking behaviour. + = low risk of bias, ? = unclear, -= high risk of bias.

Figure 10

10Forest plot of RDT performance when performed by CHWs (no subgroup analyses). Lemma 2011a = Paracheck Pf, Lemma 2011b = Parascreen pan/p.

Table 1

1RDT test performance by CHWsStudy 
Target population 
RDT type 
Reference 
standard (RS)
RS positive* (%) Sensitivity (%) Specificity (%)
Ratsimbasoa [29] >2 months (history of) fever 
CareStart 
PCR 
56.7% 
61.8% 
95%
Ratsimbasoa [29] >2 months (history of) fever 
CareStart 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS
37.2% 
95.9% 
87%
Chinkhumba [30] >5 years (history of) fever 
Bioline SD, First Response 
malaria, Paracheck PF
Microscopy of 
thick BS (expert)
38.5% 
95% 
43%
Chinkhumba [30]** >5 years (history of) fever 
Bioline SD 
Microscopy of 
thick BS (expert).
41% 
97% 
39%
Chinkhumba [30]** >5 years (history of) fever 
First response malaria 
Microscopy of 
thick BS (expert).
40% 
92% 
42%
Ishengoma [28] 
All ages, care seeking 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS.
20.8% 
88.6% 
88.2%
Ishengoma [28] 
< 5 years 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS
19.7% 
90.1% 
93.6%
Ishengoma [28] 
≥5 years 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS
21% 
88.3% 
86.5%
Ishengoma [28] 
No fever patients 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS
14.5% 
84.7% 
90.1%
Ishengoma [28] 
Fever patients 
Paracheck Pf, ParaHIT 
Microscopy of 
thick and thin BS
33.9% 
92.2% 
82.9%
Lemma [22]** 
>3 months suspected of malaria Paracheck Pf 
Microscopy of 
thick BS.
18.7% 
88.7% 
94.2%
Lemma [22]** 
>3 months suspected of malaria Parascreen 
Microscopy of 
thick BS.
18.7% 
83.2% 
95.1%
Mubi [24] 
>3 months (history of) fever. 
Paracheck Pf 
Microscopy of 
thick BS.
22.6% 
85.3% 
59.8%
Premji [31] 
Children <42 months 
Parasight TM-F test 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS.
66.6% 
84% 
81%
Tiono [14] 
Children 6-59 months 
with (history of) fever.
FirstSign Malaria Pf 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS.
54.8% 
97.9% 
53.4%
Tiono [14] 
Children 6-59 months 
with (history of) fever. 
(High transmission)
FirstSign Malaria Pf 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS.
76.1% 
98% 
25.4%
Tiono [14] 
Children 6-59 months 
with (history of) fever. 
(Low transmission)
FirstSign Malaria Pf 
Microscopy of 
thin and thick BS.
31.8% 
97.6% 
63.7%
*P. falciparum, **Two types of RDTs separately tested.

Table 2

2Interpretation and execution of RDTs by CHWsStudy 
CHW training 
Outcome interpretation 
Outcome execution
Counihan [18] Half-day training. At 3 months CHWs 
received a poster-sized job aid and a 
photographic guide on RDT 
interpretation.
(I) RDT test results correctly read by 95.1, 
98.3 and 98.3% of the CHWs at 3, 6 and 
12 months after training respectively.
19-item checklist, interpretation included, 
8 items were considered critical.
(II) Correct interpretation of positive RDT 
results was 96.5% at 3 months, 98.3% at 
6 months and 90.5% at 12 months.
Median correctly performed critical steps 
were 87.5%, 100% and 100% at 3, 6 and 
12 months respectively.
(II) Correct interpretation of negative RDT 
results was 94.3% at 3 months, 97.9% at 
6 months and 94.7% at 12 months.
40.3, 61.7 and 79.7% of CHWs correctly 
performed critical RDT steps at 3, 6 and 
12 months respectively.
(II) Faint positive lines were correctly 
interpreted by 89.7% at 3 months, 96.7% 
at 6 months and declined to 76.7% at 
12 months.
Mukanga [32] 8-day training by experienced trainers. 
Job aid provided.
100% of the RDTs were correctly interpreted 
shortly after training (<2 weeks).
96.3% of RDTs were correctly performed 
shortly after training (<2 weeks) in a 
14-item checklist, interpretation excluded.
Harvey [19] 
Group 1: only use of manufacturers' 
instructions. Group 2: only use of 
job aid. Group 3: 3-hour training on 
RDTs + job aid.
(I) 72, 86 and 96% of CHWs correctly 
interpreted RDT results for group 1, 2 
and 3 respectively.
57% of steps, 80% of steps and 90% of 
steps were correctly performed by group 
1, 2 and 3 respectively at the same day of 
receiving instructions, job aid or training in 
a 16-item checklist, interpretation included. 
(II) 54, 82 and 93% of tests were correctly 
interpreted for group 1, 2 and 3 respectively.

Table 3

3Adherence to test results by CHWsStudy 
Target population 
Treatment Alternative 
Adherence 
overall*
Positives 
treated
Negatives 
treated
CCMm studies
Chanda [23,33] 
All ages, care seeking. 
AL, SP <5 kg Complicated malaria and non-malaria 
febrile cases were referred to HF.
99.9% 
99.3% 
0.2%
Chinkhumba [30] >5 years, (history of) fever 
NS 
Referral not mentioned. 
86.9% 
98% 
58%
Elmardi [27] 
NS 
AS/SP 
Complicated malaria and non-malaria 
febrile cases were referred to HF.
70%** 
NS 
NS
Ishengoma [28] 
≥5 years with (history of) fever 
AL 
Referral not specified. 
95.8% 
98.9% 
5.4%
Mubi [24] 
>3 months, (history of) fever. 
Exclusion: severe disease
AL 
Referral not specified. 
96.8% 
99.7% 
6.1%
Ndiaye [20]*** 
Patients of all ages, care seeking. 
NS 
CHW: referral of patients <2 months, 
RDT negatives, severe symptoms, 
suspected drug adverse events. CMD: 
referral of all cases excluding 
uncomplicated malaria cases.
88.6% 
92.0% 
20.3%
Ndiaye [20]*** 
Patients of all ages, care seeking. 
NS 
CHW: Referral of patients <2 months, 
RDT negatives, severe symptoms, 
suspected drug adverse events.
85.6% 
90.1% 
24.8%
Ndiaye [20]*** 
Patients of all ages, care seeking. 
NS 
CMD: Referral of all cases excluding 
uncomplicated malaria cases.
93.9% 
95.3% 
10.4%
iCCM studies
Hamer [17] & 
Yeboah-Antwi [16]
Children 6 months-5 years, fever. 
AL 
Children with danger signs were 
referred to HF.
99.3% 
98.5% 
0.4%
Mukanga [32] 
Children <5 (history of) fever 
no danger signs.
AL 
CHWs also diagnosed and treated 
pneumonia. No referral mentioned.
97.8% 
98.6% 
4.8%
Mukanga [34]**** BF: 6-59 months, (history of) fever AL 
Referral for severe disease and for 
non-responders at day 3 after CHW visit.
99.0% 
100% 
4.8%
Mukanga [34]**** Gh: 6-59 months, (history of) fever AA 
Referral for severe disease and for 
non-responders at day 3 after CHW visit.
99.5% 
100% 
3.3%
Mukanga [34]**** Ug: 4-59 months (history of) fever. AL 
Referral for severe disease and for 
non-responders at day 3 after CHW visit.

Table 4

4Morbidity and mortality outcomes of RDT based CCMm strategiesStudy 
Design 
Intervention 
Control 
Outcome
Mubi [24] 
RCT 
RDT-based CCMm Presumptive CCMm 
Increased perception of recovery in control group (97.3%) 
versus intervention group (93.3%) at day 7. P = 0.000
Two malaria related deaths, one in each arm.
Thiam [25] 
NRCT 
RDT-based CCMm No CCMm 
Malaria related hospitalizations decreased by 43.1% in 
intervention areas and 40.9% in control areas. Malaria 
attributed deaths decreased by 62.5% in intervention 
areas (significant decrease) and 23.4% in control areas 
(no significant decrease).

Table 5

5Healthcare-seeking behaviourStudy 
Intervention 
Control 
Outcome
Elmardi [27] 
RDT-based CCMm 
Comparison with pre-intervention 
period (no CCMm)
Pre-intervention 25% of mothers of sick children <5 years would 
seek care within the village, after the study 64.7% would seek care 
within the village (p value).
Lemma [40] 
RDT-based CCMm 
Presumptive CCMm 
Only half the number of patients (5,123 patients) visited CHWs who 
performed RDT-based CCMm compared with presumptive CCMm 
(10,475 patients).

Table 6

6Cost-effectiveness of RDT based CCMm strategiesStudy 
Intervention 
Control 
Malaria prevalence 
Outcome
Hawkes [21] RDT-based CCMm for 
≥5-14 years, presumptive 
<5 years old.
Presumptive treatment up to 
14 years old.
88% by microscopy, for 
calculations prevalence 
of 80% was considered.
8.79 US$ for each case saved from unnecessary 
treatment (total health budget per person per 
year is 15$). Total costs three times as high for 
RDT based CCMm.
Lemma [22] RDT-based CCMm for 
P. falciparum with AL, 
other febrile cases 
treated with CQ.
Two comparisons. 1. RDT-based 
CCMm for P. falciparum (AL) 
and P. vivax (CQ) and referral 
of all others.
Slide positivity rate 27.29%, 
of which 70% P. falciparum.
Intervention: 4.66 US$ per correctly treated case.
Control 1. 1.69 US$ per correctly treated case.
Control 2. 11.08 US$ per correctly treated case.
2. Presumptive treatment 
with AL for all fever patients.
Total costs were lowest for intervention strategy.
Chanda [23] RDT-based CCMm with 
AL for all age groups 
(free of charge)
Health centre-based care 
(free of charge)
Prevalence 24% in RDT-based 
CCMm and 26% in health 
centres, either by RDT or 
microscopy.
Cost per case appropriately diagnosed and 
treated 4.22 US$ in RDT based CCMm 
(mainly because of higher adherence) and 
6.61 US$ in health centers. Additional cost 
per change in case appropriately diagnosed 
and treated was 4.18 US$.
http://www.malariajournal.com/content/13/1/229
AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank all authors who sent us additional information on their studies. We would also like to thank I M Nagel (Medical Library, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam) for her support with drafting the search strategies, K Vaughan (Royal Tropical Institute/Koninklijk Instituut voor de Tropen (KIT), Health Unit, Linnaeusstraat 35f, Amsterdam) for her assistance in critically assessing the cost-effectiveness studies, F ForlandFinally, since factors influencing cost-effectiveness are abundant and variable in different malaria-endemic areas and because the scarce number of studies available lack the inclusion of important benefits, an individual costeffectiveness analysis is still needed for each area preparing for RDT-based CCMm implementation[58].The implications raised in this review can be used to draft RDT-based CCMm or iCCM programmes and research projects, even for risk groups not explicitly addressed in most RDT-based CCMm studies, such as pregnant women. However, specific considerations would be in place depending on malaria pathogenesis, transmission dynamics, the existing healthcare structure and the local culture and social setting.Additional filesAdditional file 1: Search syntax. Complete search syntax per database.Additional file 2: Excluded full text articles. List of excluded full text articles with reasons.Additional file 3: Overview of included articles and reported outcomes. All included studies are listed with indication of the critical steps they report on.Additional file 4: Eight critical steps in test execution. Description of the eight critical steps that were used for judging test execution in the study of Counihan et al.[18].Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Authors' contributions ER, PFM, HS, SD and KPG conceived the idea for this study. ER and PFM designed the study and performed the searches. ER and PFM performed the primary selection of eligible studies and subsequently the inclusion of studies and the critical appraisal. Data was collected and analysed by ER and PFM with support from SD and KPG for the social anthropological issues. Any disagreements in the aforementioned steps were resolved by discussion until agreement was reached. The first draft of this manuscript was written by ER. FP critically read and advised on the manuscript. All authors have contributed to the writing of the paper and all have reviewed and approved the final version.
The economic and social burden of malaria. J Sachs, P Malaney, Nature. 415Sachs J, Malaney P: The economic and social burden of malaria. Nature 2002, 415:680-685.
Estimating the global clinical burden of Plasmodium falciparum malaria in. S I Hay, E A Okiro, P W Gething, A P Patil, A J Tatem, C A Guerra, R W Snow, PLoS Med. 71000290Hay SI, Okiro EA, Gething PW, Patil AP, Tatem AJ, Guerra CA, Snow RW: Estimating the global clinical burden of Plasmodium falciparum malaria in 2007. PLoS Med 2010, 7:e1000290.
World Health Organization: The Roll Back Malaria Strategy for Improving Access to Treatment through Home Management of Malaria. Geneva: World Health Organization. World Health Organization: The Roll Back Malaria Strategy for Improving Access to Treatment through Home Management of Malaria. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2005:1-52.
World Health Organization: Guidelines for the Treatment of Malaria. Geneva: World Health Organization. 2010World Health Organization: Guidelines for the Treatment of Malaria. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010:1-194.
Home-or community-based programmes for treating malaria (Review). C Okwundu, S Nagpal, A Musekiwa, D Sinclair, 10.1002/14651858.CD009527.pub2Art.Cochrane Database Syst RevOkwundu C, Nagpal S, Musekiwa A, Sinclair D: Home-or community-based programmes for treating malaria (Review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013, (5):Art. No.: CD009527. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009527.pub2.
Scaling-up malaria treatment: a review of the performance of different providers. Kamal-Yanni Mm, J Potet, P M Saunders, Malar J. 111Kamal-yanni MM, Potet J, Saunders PM: Scaling-up malaria treatment: a review of the performance of different providers. Malar J 2012, 11:1.
Malaria rapid diagnostic tests in endemic settings. J Maltha, P Gillet, J Jacobs, Clin Microbiol Infect. 19Maltha J, Gillet P, Jacobs J: Malaria rapid diagnostic tests in endemic settings. Clin Microbiol Infect 2013, 19:399-407.
An Equity-Focused Strategy to Improve Access to Essential Treatment Services for Children. World Health Organization. 2012iCCMUnicef: WHO/UNICEF Joint Statement Integrated Community Case Management (iCCM)World Health Organization, Unicef: WHO/UNICEF Joint Statement Integrated Community Case Management (iCCM). An Equity-Focused Strategy to Improve Access to Essential Treatment Services for Children. Geneva and New York: iCCM; 2012:1-7.
Mapping the global extent of malaria in 2005. C A Guerra, R W Snow, S I Hay, Trends Parasitol. 22Guerra CA, Snow RW, Hay SI: Mapping the global extent of malaria in 2005. Trends Parasitol 2006, 22:353-358.
Computer Program]: Version 5.2. Copenhagen: The Nordic Cochrane Centre. The Cochrane Collaboration. Review Manager (RevMan). Review Manager (RevMan) [Computer Program]: Version 5.2. Copenhagen: The Nordic Cochrane Centre. The Cochrane Collaboration; 2012.
Criteria list for assessment of methodological quality of economic evaluations: Consensus on Health Economic Criteria. S Evers, M Goossens, H De Vet, M Van Tulder, A Ament, Int J Technol Assess Health Care. 21Evers S, Goossens M, de Vet H, van Tulder M, Ament A: Criteria list for assessment of methodological quality of economic evaluations: Consensus on Health Economic Criteria. Int J Technol Assess Health Care 2005, 21:240-245.
Increased access to malaria diagnosis and treatment through free care provided in health centres and by malaria village workers in Chad. De Smet, M Philips, M Ponsar, F Gerard, S Van Herp, M ; Mali, Sierra Leone, Trop Med Int Heal. 14263supplDe Smet M, Philips M, Ponsar F, Gerard S, Van Herp M: Increased access to malaria diagnosis and treatment through free care provided in health centres and by malaria village workers in Chad, Mali and Sierra Leone. Trop Med Int Heal 2009, 14(suppl 2):63.
Role of rapid diagnostic testing (RDT) in the context of home management of childhood fever (HMCF) with dispersible artemether-lumefantrine: an open label randomized controlled trial in a rural and seasonal malaria transmission area of Burkina Faso. A B Tiono, A T Konate, N Convelbo, E Convelbo, F Pagnoni, S B Sirima, 59th Annu Meet Am Soc Trop Med Hyg. 83Tiono AB, Konate AT, Convelbo N, Convelbo E, Pagnoni F, Sirima SB: Role of rapid diagnostic testing (RDT) in the context of home management of childhood fever (HMCF) with dispersible artemether-lumefantrine: an open label randomized controlled trial in a rural and seasonal malaria transmission area of Burkina Faso. 59th Annu Meet Am Soc Trop Med Hyg 2010, 83:211-282.
Low specificity of a malaria rapid diagnostic test during an integrated community case management. A B Tiono, A Diarra, S Sanon, I Nébié, A T Konaté, F Pagnoni, S B Sirima, Infect Dis Ther. 2Tiono AB, Diarra A, Sanon S, Nébié I, Konaté AT, Pagnoni F, Sirima SB: Low specificity of a malaria rapid diagnostic test during an integrated community case management. Infect Dis Ther 2013, 2:27-36.
Free treatment, rapid malaria diagnostic tests and malaria village workers can hasten progress toward achieving the malaria related millennium development goals: the Médecins Sans Frontières experience from Chad. K Tayler-Smith, A Kociejowski, N De Lamotte, S Gerard, F Ponsar, M Philips, R Zachariah, J Public Health Africa. 2Tayler-Smith K, Kociejowski A, De Lamotte N, Gerard S, Ponsar F, Philips M, Zachariah R: Free treatment, rapid malaria diagnostic tests and malaria village workers can hasten progress toward achieving the malaria related millennium development goals: the Médecins Sans Frontières experience from Chad, Sierra-Leone and Mali. J Public Health Africa 2011, 2:50-53.
Community case management of fever due to malaria and pneumonia in children under five in Zambia: a cluster randomized controlled trial. K Yeboah-Antwi, P Pilingana, W B Macleod, K Semrau, K Siazeele, P Kalesha, B Hamainza, P Seidenberg, A Mazimba, L Sabin, K Kamholz, D M Thea, D H Hamer, PLoS Med. 71000340Yeboah-Antwi K, Pilingana P, Macleod WB, Semrau K, Siazeele K, Kalesha P, Hamainza B, Seidenberg P, Mazimba A, Sabin L, Kamholz K, Thea DM, Hamer DH: Community case management of fever due to malaria and pneumonia in children under five in Zambia: a cluster randomized controlled trial. PLoS Med 2010, 7:e1000340.
Quality and safety of integrated community case management of malaria using rapid diagnostic tests and pneumonia by community health workers. D H Hamer, E T Brooks, K Semrau, P Pilingana, W B Macleod, K Siazeele, L L Sabin, D M Thea, K Yeboah-Antwi, Pathog Glob Health. 106Hamer DH, Brooks ET, Semrau K, Pilingana P, MacLeod WB, Siazeele K, Sabin LL, Thea DM, Yeboah-Antwi K: Quality and safety of integrated community case management of malaria using rapid diagnostic tests and pneumonia by community health workers. Pathog Glob Health 2012, 106:32-39.
Community health workers use malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) safely and accurately: results of a longitudinal study in Zambia. H Counihan, S A Harvey, M Sekeseke-Chinyama, B Hamainza, R Banda, T Malambo, F Masaninga, D Bell, Am J Trop Med Hyg. 87Counihan H, Harvey SA, Sekeseke-Chinyama M, Hamainza B, Banda R, Malambo T, Masaninga F, Bell D: Community health workers use malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) safely and accurately: results of a longitudinal study in Zambia. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2012, 87:57-63.
Improving community health worker use of malaria rapid diagnostic tests in Zambia: package instructions, job aid and job aid-plus-training. S A Harvey, L Jennings, M Chinyama, F Masaninga, K Mulholland, D R Bell, Malar J. 7160Harvey SA, Jennings L, Chinyama M, Masaninga F, Mulholland K, Bell DR: Improving community health worker use of malaria rapid diagnostic tests in Zambia: package instructions, job aid and job aid-plus-training. Malar J 2008, 7:160.
Community case management in malaria: review and perspectives after four years of operational experience in Saraya district, south-east Senegal. Y Ndiaye, J L Ndiaye, B Cisse, D Blanas, J Bassene, I A Manga, M Ndiath, S L Faye, M Bocoum, M Ndiaye, P M Thior, D Sene, P Milligan, O Gaye, D Schellenberg, Malar J. 12240Ndiaye Y, Ndiaye JL, Cisse B, Blanas D, Bassene J, Manga IA, Ndiath M, Faye SL, Bocoum M, Ndiaye M, Thior PM, Sene D, Milligan P, Gaye O, Schellenberg D: Community case management in malaria: review and perspectives after four years of operational experience in Saraya district, south-east Senegal. Malar J 2013, 12:240.
Use and limitations of malaria rapid diagnostic testing by community health workers in war-torn Democratic Republic of Congo. M Hawkes, J P Katsuva, C K Masumbuko, Malar J. 8308Hawkes M, Katsuva JP, Masumbuko CK: Use and limitations of malaria rapid diagnostic testing by community health workers in war-torn Democratic Republic of Congo. Malar J 2009, 8:308.
Cost-effectiveness of three malaria treatment strategies in rural Tigray, Ethiopia where both Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax co-dominate. H Lemma, San Sebastian, M Löfgren, C Barnabas, G , Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 92Lemma H, San Sebastian M, Löfgren C, Barnabas G: Cost-effectiveness of three malaria treatment strategies in rural Tigray, Ethiopia where both Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax co-dominate. Cost Eff Resour Alloc 2011, 9:2.
Relative costs and effectiveness of treating uncomplicated malaria in two rural districts in Zambia: implications for nationwide scale-up of home-based management. P Chanda, B Hamainza, H B Moonga, V Chalwe, P Banda, F Pagnoni, Malar J. 10159Chanda P, Hamainza B, Moonga HB, Chalwe V, Banda P, Pagnoni F: Relative costs and effectiveness of treating uncomplicated malaria in two rural districts in Zambia: implications for nationwide scale-up of home-based management. Malar J 2011, 10:159.
Malaria rapid testing by community health workers is effective and safe for targeting malaria treatment: randomised cross-over trial in Tanzania. M Mubi, A Janson, M Warsame, A Mårtensson, K Källander, M G Petzold, B Ngasala, G Maganga, L L Gustafsson, A Massele, G Tomson, Z Premji, A Björkman, PLoS One. 619753Mubi M, Janson A, Warsame M, Mårtensson A, Källander K, Petzold MG, Ngasala B, Maganga G, Gustafsson LL, Massele A, Tomson G, Premji Z, Björkman A: Malaria rapid testing by community health workers is effective and safe for targeting malaria treatment: randomised cross-over trial in Tanzania. PLoS One 2011, 6:e19753.
Scale-up of home-based management of malaria based on rapid diagnostic tests and artemisininbased combination therapy in a resource-poor country: results in Senegal. S Thiam, J Thwing, I Diallo, F B Fall, M B Diouf, R Perry, M Diop, M L Diouf, M M Cisse, M M Diaw, M Thior, Malar J. 11334Thiam S, Thwing J, Diallo I, Fall FB, Diouf MB, Perry R, Diop M, Diouf ML, Cisse MM, Diaw MM, Thior M: Scale-up of home-based management of malaria based on rapid diagnostic tests and artemisininbased combination therapy in a resource-poor country: results in Senegal. Malar J 2012, 11:334.
Using community-owned resource persons to provide early diagnosis and treatment and estimate malaria burden at community level in north-eastern Tanzania. Asm Rutta, F Francis, B P Mmbando, D S Ishengoma, S H Sembuche, E K Malecela, J Y Sadi, M L Kamugisha, M M Lemnge, Malar J. 11152Rutta ASM, Francis F, Mmbando BP, Ishengoma DS, Sembuche SH, Malecela EK, Sadi JY, Kamugisha ML, Lemnge MM: Using community-owned resource persons to provide early diagnosis and treatment and estimate malaria burden at community level in north-eastern Tanzania. Malar J 2012, 11:152.
Feasibility and acceptability of home-based management of malaria strategy adapted to Sudan's conditions using artemisinin-based combination therapy and rapid diagnostic test. K A Elmardi, E M Malik, T Abdelgadir, S H Ali, A H Elsyed, M A Mudather, A H Elhassan, I Adam, Malar J. 839Elmardi KA, Malik EM, Abdelgadir T, Ali SH, Elsyed AH, Mudather MA, Elhassan AH, Adam I: Feasibility and acceptability of home-based management of malaria strategy adapted to Sudan's conditions using artemisinin-based combination therapy and rapid diagnostic test. Malar J 2009, 8:39.
Accuracy of malaria rapid diagnostic tests in community studies and their impact on treatment of malaria in an area with declining malaria burden in north-eastern Tanzania. D S Ishengoma, F Francis, B P Mmbando, J P Lusingu, P Magistrado, M Alifrangis, T G Theander, I C Bygbjerg, M M Lemnge, Malar J. 10176Ishengoma DS, Francis F, Mmbando BP, Lusingu JP, Magistrado P, Alifrangis M, Theander TG, Bygbjerg IC, Lemnge MM: Accuracy of malaria rapid diagnostic tests in community studies and their impact on treatment of malaria in an area with declining malaria burden in north-eastern Tanzania. Malar J 2011, 10:176.
Management of uncomplicated malaria in febrile under five-year-old children by community health workers in Madagascar: reliability of malaria rapid diagnostic tests. A Ratsimbasoa, H Ravony, J-A Vonimpaisomihanta, R Raherinjafy, M Jahevitra, R Rapelanoro, Jddm Rakotomanga, D Malvy, P Millet, D Ménard, Malar J. 1185Ratsimbasoa A, Ravony H, Vonimpaisomihanta J-A, Raherinjafy R, Jahevitra M, Rapelanoro R, Rakotomanga JDDM, Malvy D, Millet P, Ménard D: Management of uncomplicated malaria in febrile under five-year-old children by community health workers in Madagascar: reliability of malaria rapid diagnostic tests. Malar J 2012, 11:85.
Comparative field performance and adherence to test results of four malaria rapid diagnostic tests among febrile patients more than five years of age in. J Chinkhumba, J Skarbinski, B Chilima, C Campbell, V Ewing, M San Joaquin, Sande J Ali, D Mathanga, D , Malar J. 9209Chinkhumba J, Skarbinski J, Chilima B, Campbell C, Ewing V, San Joaquin M, Sande J, Ali D, Mathanga D: Comparative field performance and adherence to test results of four malaria rapid diagnostic tests among febrile patients more than five years of age in Blantyre, Malawi. Malar J 2010, 9:209.
Laboratory diagnosis of malaria by village health workers using the rapid manual ParaSightTM-F test. Z Premji, J N Minjas, C J Shiff, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 88418Premji Z, Minjas JN, Shiff CJ: Laboratory diagnosis of malaria by village health workers using the rapid manual ParaSightTM-F test. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1994, 88:418.
Can lay community health workers be trained to use diagnostics to distinguish and treat malaria and pneumonia in children? Lessons from rural Uganda. D Mukanga, R Babirye, S Peterson, G W Pariyo, G Ojiambo, J K Tibenderana, P Nsubuga, K Kallander, Trop Med Int Health. 16Mukanga D, Babirye R, Peterson S, Pariyo GW, Ojiambo G, Tibenderana JK, Nsubuga P, Kallander K: Can lay community health workers be trained to use diagnostics to distinguish and treat malaria and pneumonia in children? Lessons from rural Uganda. Trop Med Int Health 2011, 16:1234-1242.
Community case management of malaria using ACT and RDT in two districts in Zambia: achieving high adherence to test results using community health workers. P Chanda, B Hamainza, H B Moonga, V Chalwe, F Pagnoni, Malar J. 10158Chanda P, Hamainza B, Moonga HB, Chalwe V, Pagnoni F: Community case management of malaria using ACT and RDT in two districts in Zambia: achieving high adherence to test results using community health workers. Malar J 2011, 10:158.
Integrated community case management of fever in children under five using rapid diagnostic tests and respiratory rate counting: a multi-country cluster randomized trial. D Mukanga, A B Tiono, T Anyorigiya, K Källander, A T Konaté, A R Oduro, J K Tibenderana, L Amenga-Etego, S B Sirima, S Cousens, G Barnish, F Pagnoni, Am J Trop Med Hyg. 20125SupplMukanga D, Tiono AB, Anyorigiya T, Källander K, Konaté AT, Oduro AR, Tibenderana JK, Amenga-Etego L, Sirima SB, Cousens S, Barnish G, Pagnoni F: Integrated community case management of fever in children under five using rapid diagnostic tests and respiratory rate counting: a multi-country cluster randomized trial. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2012, 87(5 Suppl):21-29.
Community acceptability of use of rapid diagnostic tests for malaria by community health workers in Uganda. D Mukanga, J K Tibenderana, J Kiguli, G W Pariyo, P Waiswa, F Bajunirwe, B Mutamba, H Counihan, G Ojiambo, K Kallander, Malar J. 9203Mukanga D, Tibenderana JK, Kiguli J, Pariyo GW, Waiswa P, Bajunirwe F, Mutamba B, Counihan H, Ojiambo G, Kallander K: Community acceptability of use of rapid diagnostic tests for malaria by community health workers in Uganda. Malar J 2010, 9:203.
Feasibility of home management using ACT for childhood malaria episodes in an urban setting. D S Nsagha, J-Bn Elat, P A Ndong, P N Tata, M-Nn Tayong, F F Pokem, C C Wankah, Drug Healthc Patient Saf. 4Nsagha DS, Elat J-BN, Ndong PA, Tata PN, Tayong M-NN, Pokem FF, Wankah CC: Feasibility of home management using ACT for childhood malaria episodes in an urban setting. Drug Healthc Patient Saf 2012, 4:1-18.
Access, acceptability and utilization of community health workers using diagnostics for case management of fever in Ugandan children: a cross-sectional study. D Mukanga, J K Tibenderana, S Peterson, G W Pariyo, J Kiguli, P Waiswa, R Babirye, G Ojiambo, S Kasasa, F Pagnoni, K Kallander, Malar J. 11121Mukanga D, Tibenderana JK, Peterson S, Pariyo GW, Kiguli J, Waiswa P, Babirye R, Ojiambo G, Kasasa S, Pagnoni F, Kallander K: Access, acceptability and utilization of community health workers using diagnostics for case management of fever in Ugandan children: a cross-sectional study. Malar J 2012, 11:121.
Barriers to community case management of malaria in Saraya, Senegal: training, and supply-chains. D A Blanas, Y Ndiaye, K Nichols, A Jensen, A Siddiqui, N Hennig, Malar J. 1295Blanas DA, Ndiaye Y, Nichols K, Jensen A, Siddiqui A, Hennig N: Barriers to community case management of malaria in Saraya, Senegal: training, and supply-chains. Malar J 2013, 12:95.
Low referral completion of rapid diagnostic test-negative patients in community-based treatment of malaria in Sierra Leone. A Thomson, M Khogali, M De Smet, T Reid, A Mukhtar, S Peterson, Von Schreeb, J , Malar J. 1094Thomson A, Khogali M, de Smet M, Reid T, Mukhtar A, Peterson S, von Schreeb J: Low referral completion of rapid diagnostic test-negative patients in community-based treatment of malaria in Sierra Leone. Malar J 2011, 10:94.
Deploying artemether-lumefantrine with rapid testing in Ethiopian communities: impact on malaria morbidity, mortality and healthcare resources. H Lemma, P Byass, A Desta, A Bosman, G Costanzo, L Toma, E Fottrell, A-C Marrast, Y Ambachew, A Getachew, N Mulure, A Morrone, A Bianchi, G A Barnabas, Trop Med Int Health. 15Lemma H, Byass P, Desta A, Bosman A, Costanzo G, Toma L, Fottrell E, Marrast A-C, Ambachew Y, Getachew A, Mulure N, Morrone A, Bianchi A, Barnabas GA: Deploying artemether-lumefantrine with rapid testing in Ethiopian communities: impact on malaria morbidity, mortality and healthcare resources. Trop Med Int Health 2010, 15:241-250.
Impact of asymptomatic Plasmodium falciparum parasitemia on the imunohematological indices among school children and adolescents in a rural area highly endemic for malaria in southern Mozambique. E Samo Gudo, A Prista, I V Jani, BMC Infect Dis. 13244Samo Gudo E, Prista A, Jani IV: Impact of asymptomatic Plasmodium falciparum parasitemia on the imunohematological indices among school children and adolescents in a rural area highly endemic for malaria in southern Mozambique. BMC Infect Dis 2013, 13:244.
Changing malaria epidemiology and diagnostic criteria for Plasmodium falciparum clinical malaria. C Roucher, C Rogier, F Dieye-Ba, C Sokhna, A Tall, J-F Trape, PLoS One. 746188Roucher C, Rogier C, Dieye-Ba F, Sokhna C, Tall A, Trape J-F: Changing malaria epidemiology and diagnostic criteria for Plasmodium falciparum clinical malaria. PLoS One 2012, 7:e46188.
Are rapid diagnostic tests more accurate in diagnosis of Plasmodium falciparum malaria compared to microscopy at rural health centres?. V Batwala, P Magnussen, F Nuwaha, Malar J. 9349Batwala V, Magnussen P, Nuwaha F: Are rapid diagnostic tests more accurate in diagnosis of Plasmodium falciparum malaria compared to microscopy at rural health centres? Malar J 2010, 9:349.
Van Den Broek I: Paracheck-Pf® accuracy and recently treated Plasmodium falciparum infections: is there a risk of over-diagnosis ?. T D Swarthout, H Counihan, Rkk Senga, Malar J. 658Swarthout TD, Counihan H, Senga RKK, Van Den Broek I: Paracheck-Pf® accuracy and recently treated Plasmodium falciparum infections: is there a risk of over-diagnosis ? Malar J 2007, 6:58.
H A Landsberger, Hawthorne Revisited: Management and the Worker, Its Critics, and Developments in Human Relations in Industry. Ithaca (N.Y.Cornell university press1958Landsberger HA: Hawthorne Revisited: Management and the Worker, Its Critics, and Developments in Human Relations in Industry. Ithaca (N.Y.): Cornell university press; 1958:0-119.
and the Philippines. A Albertini, E Lee, S O Coulibaly, M Sleshi, Faye B Mationg, M L Ouedraogo, K Tsadik, A G Feleke, S M Diallo, I Gaye, O Luchavez, J Bennett, J Bell, D , Malaria rapid diagnostic test transport and storage conditions in. Burkina Faso, Senegal, Ethiopia11406Albertini A, Lee E, Coulibaly SO, Sleshi M, Faye B, Mationg ML, Ouedraogo K, Tsadik AG, Feleke SM, Diallo I, Gaye O, Luchavez J, Bennett J, Bell D: Malaria rapid diagnostic test transport and storage conditions in Burkina Faso, Senegal, Ethiopia and the Philippines. Malar J 2012, 11:406.
World Health Organization: Malaria Rapid Diagnostic Test Performance: Results of WHO Product Testing of Malaria RDTs: Round 4. 2012Geneva: World Health Organization on behalf of the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical DiseasesWorld Health Organization: Malaria Rapid Diagnostic Test Performance: Results of WHO Product Testing of Malaria RDTs: Round 4 (2012). Geneva: World Health Organization on behalf of the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases 2012; 2012:0-125.
Effect of Malaria Rapid Diagnostic Tests on the Management of Uncomplicated Malaria with Artemether-Lumefantrine in Kenya : A Cluster Randomized Trial. J Skarbinski, P O Ouma, L M Causer, S K Kariuki, J W Barnwell, J A Alaii, De Oliveira, A M Zurovac, D Larson, B A Snow, R W Rowe, A K Laserson, K F Akhwale, W S Slutsker, L Hamel, M J , Am J Trop Med Hyg. 80Skarbinski J, Ouma PO, Causer LM, Kariuki SK, Barnwell JW, Alaii JA, De Oliveira AM, Zurovac D, Larson BA, Snow RW, Rowe AK, Laserson KF, Akhwale WS, Slutsker L, Hamel MJ: Effect of Malaria Rapid Diagnostic Tests on the Management of Uncomplicated Malaria with Artemether-Lumefantrine in Kenya : A Cluster Randomized Trial. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2009, 80:919-926.
Use of RDTs to improve malaria diagnosis and fever case management at primary health care facilities in Uganda. D J Kyabayinze, C Asiimwe, D Nakanjako, J Nabakooza, H Counihan, J K Tibenderana, Malar J. 9Kyabayinze DJ, Asiimwe C, Nakanjako D, Nabakooza J, Counihan H, Tibenderana JK: Use of RDTs to improve malaria diagnosis and fever case management at primary health care facilities in Uganda. Malar J 2010, 9:200.
Increased use of malaria rapid diagnostic tests improves targeting of anti-malarial treatment in rural Tanzania : implications for nationwide rollout of malaria rapid diagnostic tests. I M Masanja, M Selemani, B Amuri, D Kajungu, R Khatib, S P Kachur, J Skarbinski, Malar J. 11221Masanja IM, Selemani M, Amuri B, Kajungu D, Khatib R, Kachur SP, Skarbinski J: Increased use of malaria rapid diagnostic tests improves targeting of anti-malarial treatment in rural Tanzania : implications for nationwide rollout of malaria rapid diagnostic tests. Malar J 2012, 11:221.
Reduction of anti-malarial consumption after rapid diagnostic tests implementation in Dar es Salaam : a before-after and cluster randomized controlled study. V D&apos; Acremont, J Kahama-Maro, N Swai, D Mtasiwa, B Genton, C Lengeler, Malar J. 10107D' Acremont V, Kahama-maro J, Swai N, Mtasiwa D, Genton B, Lengeler C: Reduction of anti-malarial consumption after rapid diagnostic tests implementation in Dar es Salaam : a before-after and cluster randomized controlled study. Malar J 2011, 10:107.
Getting antimalarials on target: impact of national roll-out of malaria rapid diagnostic tests on health facility treatment in three regions of Tanzania. K Bruxvoort, A Kalolella, H Nchimbi, C Festo, M Taylor, R Thomson, M Cairns, J Thwing, I Kleinschmidt, C Goodman, S P Kachur, Trop Med Int Health. 18Bruxvoort K, Kalolella A, Nchimbi H, Festo C, Taylor M, Thomson R, Cairns M, Thwing J, Kleinschmidt I, Goodman C, Kachur SP: Getting antimalarials on target: impact of national roll-out of malaria rapid diagnostic tests on health facility treatment in three regions of Tanzania. Trop Med Int Health 2013, 18:1269-1282.
Risks and benefits of targeted malaria treatment based on rapid diagnostic test results. A Björkman, A Mårtensson, Clin Infect Dis. 51Björkman A, Mårtensson A: Risks and benefits of targeted malaria treatment based on rapid diagnostic test results. Clin Infect Dis 2010, 51:512-514.
Deficient supplies of drugs for life threatening diseases in an African community. N N Lufesi, M Andrew, I Aursnes, BMC Health Serv Res. 786Lufesi NN, Andrew M, Aursnes I: Deficient supplies of drugs for life threatening diseases in an African community. BMC Health Serv Res 2007, 7:86.
Scheel I: Lay health workers in primary and community health care for maternal and child health and the management of infectious diseases: a review synopsis. S Lewin, S Munabi-Babigumira, C Glenton, K Daniels, X Bosch-Capblanch, B Van Wyk, J Odgaard-Jensen, M Johansen, Aja G Zwarenstein, M , Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 28Lewin S, Munabi-Babigumira S, Glenton C, Daniels K, Bosch-Capblanch X, van Wyk B, Odgaard-Jensen J, Johansen M, Aja G, Zwarenstein M, Scheel I: Lay health workers in primary and community health care for maternal and child health and the management of infectious diseases: a review synopsis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010, 28:243-245.
Barriers and facilitators to the implementation of lay health worker programmes to improve access to maternal and child health: qualitative evidence synthesis. C Glenton, C J Colvin, B Carlsen, A Swartz, S Lewin, J Noyes, A Rashidian, 10.1002/14651858.CD010414.pub2Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 10Glenton C, Colvin CJ, Carlsen B, Swartz A, Lewin S, Noyes J, Rashidian A: Barriers and facilitators to the implementation of lay health worker programmes to improve access to maternal and child health: qualitative evidence synthesis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013, (10):Art. No.: CD010414. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010414.pub2.
Interventions to improve motivation and retention of community health workers delivering integrated community case management (iCCM): stakeholder perceptions and priorities. D L Strachan, K Kallander, Ten Asbroek, A H Kirkwood, B Meek, S R Benton, L Conteh, L Tibenderana, J Hill, Z , Am J Trop Med Hyg. 20125Strachan DL, Kallander K, Ten Asbroek AH, Kirkwood B, Meek SR, Benton L, Conteh L, Tibenderana J, Hill Z: Interventions to improve motivation and retention of community health workers delivering integrated community case management (iCCM): stakeholder perceptions and priorities. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2012, 87(5):111-119.
Cost-effectiveness of malaria diagnostic methods in sub-Saharan Africa in an era of combination therapy. S Shillcutt, C Morel, C Goodman, P Coleman, D Bell, J M Whitty, A Mills, 10.1186/1475-2875-13-229Bull World Health Organ. 86Shillcutt S, Morel C, Goodman C, Coleman P, Bell D, Whitty JM, Mills A: Cost-effectiveness of malaria diagnostic methods in sub-Saharan Africa in an era of combination therapy. Bull World Health Organ 2008, 86:101-110. doi:10.1186/1475-2875-13-229
Success or failure of critical steps in community case management of malaria with rapid diagnostic tests: a systematic review. Ruizendaal, Malaria Journal. 13229Cite this article asCite this article as: Ruizendaal et al.: Success or failure of critical steps in community case management of malaria with rapid diagnostic tests: a systematic review. Malaria Journal 2014 13:229.
