
Introduction

Although quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping is a very useful approach for identifying regions on the genome associated with a phenotype of interest, the mapped intervals are often very broad and contain many genes. The number of genes within the QTL must then be narrowed using genetic and bioinformatic approaches {{not_in_s2orc}}. These methods yield promising results, substantially reducing the candidate gene number. However, the steps are tedious and time-consuming, and the work required is commensurate with the starting number of genes. Thus, any method that narrows the QTL confidence interval, thereby excluding many less likely candidate genes, saves time and money. A recent advance in QTL mapping involves combining QTL cross data; in this process the data from different crosses are combined when a QTL is identified in the same chromosomal region and it is believed that the same gene underlies the QTL.
In a QTL located using genotype data from F2 mice from a cross between inbred strains, a parental strain is determined to be the "high-allele strain" for that QTL by the effect plot for the peak marker; the homozygous genotype with the higher average phenotype carries the high allele. When genotype data from different crosses are combined, the high alleles are coded identically on a per-chromosome basis and the original cross is used as a covariate in analysis. Combining the datasets adds power to the QTL analysis, and if the underlying gene is the same, the resulting confidence interval is reduced. This method has been used in other species like the pig {{35047277}}, and it complements other recent advancements in QTL mapping, such as the meta-analysis of QTL LOD values {{11582607}}{{23997292}} or the pooling of assigned P-values along an entire QTL based on localized LOD scores {{14076080}}.
The level of homology between genomes of different species is variable at both the species and genomic level, depending both on the overall relatedness of the two species at hand and on the underlying physiology and genomic architecture which define the species. Closely related species may share a similar genomic structure with contiguous patches of nearly identical sequence and shared clusters of genes. In the last decade, the sequencing of the mouse {{3835668}} and the rat {{4415600}} has allowed for a detailed analysis of the genomic divergence of the two species, revealing areas of both high and low sequence conservation {{37373525}}.
For many phenotypes, QTL are concordant among different species. High Density Lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol QTL are homologous between humans and mice {{11053934}}{{16028727}}, and kidney disease and hypertension QTL are homologous among rat, mouse, and human {{207257232}}{{1777782}}. This QTL concordance suggests an underlying shared contiguity of genetically mapped loci, which opens up the possibility to expand the combining of crosses beyond the use of one species. A successful combination is perhaps most likely using data from the mouse and the rat, as the two species are closely related and research involving both in the laboratory employs the use of inbred strains and similar crossing strategies.
We explored the possibility of narrowing HDL cholesterol QTL by combining data from one rat cross {{44296026}}{{28604142}} and two mouse crosses {{28727880}}{{18939187}}{{15345967}}{{34891486}}. Our results show that in parallel with the combination of QTL datasets from the same species, it is possible to both increase the statistical significance of a QTL and narrow the confidence interval of the homologous QTL region using the combined data from two different species.

Materials and methods

QTL datasets

The WxDA dataset. WOKW and DA rats were reciprocally crossed to produce two F2 crosses of 76 (WOKW×DA) F2 and 74 (DA×WOKW) F2 male and 72 (WOKW×DA) F2 and 68 (DA×WOKW) F2 female rats. Animals received a standard chow diet. Blood samples were taken at 28, 30, and 32 weeks, and HDL cholesterol levels were determined using a Roche Cobas Mira Plus auto analyzer. Values did not differ between the two crosses, and the crosses were therefore combined. Details of this dataset were previously published by {{28604142}} and {{not_in_s2orc}}. In these papers 126 microsatellite markers were used for genome-wide genotyping; since the publication, 19 additional markers have been genotyped, for a total of 145 markers.
The PxD2 dataset. PERA/EiJ and DBA/2J mice were reciprocally crossed to produce 324 F2 progeny (166 females and 158 males). All animals were fed a chow diet until 6-8 weeks of age, followed by an 8-week atherogenic diet {{5496588}}. Ninety-seven microsatellite markers were used for genome-wide genotyping. Details of this dataset were previously published by {{34891486}}.
The BxD2 dataset. This dataset has been described by {{18939187}}{{28727880}}{{15345967}}. C57BL/6J female mice were crossed to DBA/2J males, and the F1 mice were crossed to produce 111 female F2 progeny. The F2 females were fed a chow diet for 12 months and then fed an atherogenic diet for 16 weeks prior to phenotypic measurements. The mice were genotyped using 139 microsatellite markers.
Placing rat markers on the mouse genome

To determine the version 3.4 (November 2004 update) base pair positions of the microsatellite markers used in the WxD cross, marker IDs were used as input using the batch version of UCSC genome browser's Table Browser (http://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/ hgTables?command=start). Markers that were not available through the UCSC genome browser were looked up individually in Ensembl (www.ensembl.org); markers without basepair positions at that point were discarded from the dataset. Of the 145 markers, 138 were assigned updated positions. UCSC's web-based version of the batch coordinate conversion tool LiftOver (http://genome.ucsc.edu/ cgi-bin/hgLiftOver) was used to convert the rat genome positions to homologous mouse genome positions (NCBI build 37). Using this method, all but 10 of the 138 markers were converted; the remaining markers were positioned in Ensembl, and using Ensembl's Comparative Genomics tool, genes adjacent to the rat marker and both homologous and contiguous to the mouse genome were determined. The mouse position of the nearest homologous gene in a contiguous sequence of genes was used as the rat marker's homologous position. For example, using Liftover, base pair positions for rat marker D10Mgh12 are not homologous to the mouse genome. However, the gene Lcp2 is adjacent to D10Mgh12 at 19,019,978-19,066,754 bp and contiguous to the other homologous mouse positions on chromosome (Chr) 11 at 33,947,144-33,992,281. Using the above methods, all but three rat markers-D2Wox32, D8Mit6 and D10Mgh2were aligned to the mouse genome.
Assigning genetic map positions to the rat markers

Rat genome genetic positions for the rat markers were determined by interpolation to the SNP map recently published by the STAR Consortium {{12007275}}; the version 3.4 base-pair positions and STAR map cM positions are publicly available online at http:// www.well.ox.ac.uk/ rat_mapping_resources/ SNPmaps.html. Marker base pair positions were interpolated to the STAR map using MATLAB. The homologous mouse positions of the rat markers were interpolated to the Revised Shifman genetic map of the mouse {{13195015}}) using the Center for Genome Dynamic's online Mouse Map Converter (http:// cgd.jax.org/mousemapconverter/). Mouse chromosome and base pair positions were used as input, and sex-averaged cM positions were selected as output.
Single dataset QTL analysis

Individual QTL analyses were performed on the WxD rat dataset using rat positions, and then on each single mouse dataset using mouse positions. QTL analyses were performed using R version 2.8.1 and R/qtl version 1.11-12 {{2102099}}. X-chromosome genotyping data were omitted. Genome scans were performed using the EM algorithm {{15540652}} with 2 cM resolution, and significance thresholds were determined by permutation testing (1000 permutations). To determine which sex contributed more to a QTL, sex vs. HDL effect plots were created. Then, the datasets were separated by sex and reanalyzed to determine the adjusted QTL peak and confidence interval positions. For all analyses, 95% confidence intervals were determined by Bayesian analysis using the bayesint function in R/qtl, which calculates an approximate interval (endpoints around the maximum LOD) for a given chromosome using the genome scan output. Allele effects were determined using the effect plot function in R/qtl using the QTL peak marker or marker nearest to the peak as the reference marker.
Combining the rat and mouse QTL datasets and multi-species QTL analysis

The rat marker names were listed in chromosome and base-pair order in an Excel spreadsheet, along with the rat genetic position, the homologous mouse position, and the mouse genetic position. In the spreadsheet, the QTL peaks, confidence intervals and allele assignments for both the rat and mouse individual crosses were shaded. This allowed for the visualization of homologous and contiguous rat and mouse markers within a mouse QTL. Data were chosen for combination if the following criteria were met: 1) A set of markers within a rat HDL QTL significantly overlapped a mouse QTL based on homology with at least half of the markers from each species-specific QTL overlapping; 2) The markers were contiguous in both genomes; and 3) The peaks of the homologous QTL were close enough to suggest that the QTL from each species were caused by the same gene. In each case, the homologous peak positions were either adjacent or aligned in the same row in the Excel spreadsheet. In some cases, markers within a rat QTL were not included in the combinedspecies analysis. For example, a rat QTL marker was excluded if it was within a rat QTL but outside of a homologous mouse QTL.
The original rat HDL cholesterol values were converted to the same unit as was used for mice (mg/dL). Prior to combining datasets, the HDL phenotype was log-transformed and then standardized by Z-score in R within each cross. The datasets were combined by mouse chromosome as in {{34891486}}, by coding high and low allele strains the same and then combining the datasets into one file.
The data were combined and analyzed one chromosome at a time. We followed the linear models and analyses described in ) (see equations 1-5) for all QTL scans. R/qtl version 1.11-12 was used for QTL analyses, and the EM algorithm with a resolution of 2 cM was used for the scan and for determining significance thresholds with 1000 permutations. For the combined plots, the significance thresholds were based on the additive model. Only one covariate was used in the analysis, representing either cross, species or sex, as there were no nested factors to consider within each covariate.
Determining the number of genes within the QTL confidence interval

NCBI build 37 gene lists for Mus Musculus for chromosomes 11 and 12 were downloaded via Ensembl's BioMart (www.ensembl.org/biomart/martview); gene attributes selected for download were Ensembl Gene ID, Ensembl Transcript ID, Associated Gene Name, Gene Start (bp), Gene End (bp), and Description. The list of genes was downloaded as a csv file and then opened in MS Excel. The gene list was sorted by Gene Start base pair position and all gene repeats were removed (reflecting multiple transcripts per gene); such repeats were detected as duplicate Ensembl Gene IDs. To determine the number of genes within a QTL confidence interval, any gene with a starting base pair position within the confidence interval was counted. To convert from cM to Build 37 base pair positions, we used the Mouse Map Converter available on The Jackson Laboratory's Center for Genome Dynamics Website (http://cgd.jax.org/mousemap converter). We chose the sex-averaged cM position as input. In comparing the gene lists within the QTL confidence intervals prior to and after species combination, the confidence interval resulting from analysis with the speciesadditive covariate model was chosen for the post-analysis interval.

Results

The results of the rat WxDA genome scan are shown in Figure 1. Running the first genome scan with sex as a covariate revealed the presence of multiple sex-specific QTL on Chrs 2, 4, 6, 7 and 9. Plotting genome scans using male and female data separately revealed which sex contributes to each sex-specific QTL detected in the covariate analysis and also unveiled any sex effects not detected in the first scan. Figures 1C and 1D show additional sex differences on Chrs 1, 3, 5, 8, 10 through 14, and 17. Due to the high incidence of sexspecific or sex-influenced QTL, the male and female data from the rat and mouse datasets were separated for individual species analysis; only QTL from these analyses were considered for multi-species combination. The separation of sexes also facilitates the analysis of the combined data, as the influence of the sex, species and cross covariates may be assessed as one covariate. The genome scan plots for the separate mouse crosses are not shown, as they were previously published {{28727880}}{{18939187}}{{15345967}}{{34891486}} The markers listed for rat Chrs 6 and 10 from the WxDA dataset, along with their rat genetic map positions and mouse genetic map positions on Chrs 12 and 11, are shown in Figure 2. The following rat-mouse QTL HDL data combinations were tested: Of these individual QTL, the PxD2 Chr 11 QTL is the only one that was previously published . The rat chromosomes 6 and 10 QTL were suggestive (LOD = 2.05 and LOD = 2.2, respectively) and not published previously.
The phenotypes were standardized by Z-score in the individual QTL datasets and combined by identically coding the high-and low-allele strains. The results of the QTL analyses for the combinations are shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4. Table 1 lists the peaks, confidence intervals and LOD scores for the original mouse QTL, and for the additive and interactive QTL resulting from the combination of data from different species. The numbers of genes within the original and species-additive confidence intervals are shown in Table 2. Figure 3 shows the result of combining rat Chr 6 data with mouse Chr 12 data. The interactive, additive and non-covariate plots are all identical and overlaid, indicating that the QTL is probably not species-specific. The LOD is substantially higher than the original mouse QTL and the confidence interval is narrowed from 44 cM to 22 cM. The number of genes in the confidence interval is reduced from 613 to 304 genes. Figure 4 shows the result of combining rat Chr 10 data with the mouse PxD Chr 11 female QTL data resulted in a narrowing of the confidence interval and an increase in LOD from 2.3 to 3.7 (additive model). The additive and non-covariate plots are identical and overlaid. Although the interaction LOD score is somewhat higher than the additive model, the difference between them is not significant (ΔLOD=0.8). Thus, we conclude that the QTL is not species-specific. The confidence interval was reduced from 41 cM to 19 cM and the number of genes in the confidence interval was reduced from 1343 to 761 genes.


CITED_PAPERS:


14076080:A Simple Method for Combining Genetic Mapping Data from Multiple Crosses and Experimental Designs


INTRODUCTION

The majority of traits that show variation based on genetic influences are affected by multiple genes of small effect as well as by environment. When compelling candidates for direct investigation are not available, QTL mapping provides an effective approach to localizing regions of the genome that are likely to mediate genetic variation in the phenotype. Mapping a QTL to an interval of 20-60 Mb has become a relatively routine matter for traits with at least moderate heritability, but narrowing the interval to a small region that includes only a few candidate genes (1)(2)(3)(4)(5) Mb at most) is still a highly challenging task.
A variety of methods for accomplishing the task of narrowing a QTL interval have been proposed [1][2][3][4][5] and each has advantages and disadvantages. Our complementary approach combines the results for a variety of mapping studies, each of which should add a degree of precision and significance to the final result. In this paper we describe our method and provide an implementation, which handles the problem of combining data using different markers as well as converting from genetic to physical maps and regularizing positions to be combined.
Our method calculates locus-specific P-values using the distribution of alleles at each locus. For large populations of genetically independent animals, the negative log of these locus-specific P-values is very similar to the more typically reported LOD scores, but for smaller populations like recombinant inbred strains, and nonindependent populations such as advanced intercross lines, and especially for populations with missing data, they are an important innovation. For these populations, converting to locus-specific Pvalues is more informative and allows us to apply Fisher's combination test to combination of QTL mapping results.
Since each QTL mapping effort originates from an independently generated population, the pattern of alleles inherited in one population is independent of the pattern of alleles inherited in another population. Therefore under the null hypothesis of no linkage, locus-specific P-values for any arbitrary point on the genome are strictly independent between data sets. Given the independence of our data sets, we chose to address the problem of combining multiple testing results by using Fisher's combination test.
Since Fisher's combination test operates on P-values, our approach first defines locus-specific P-values in the original and permuted QTL maps, then combines QTL maps on a point-wise basis using Fisher's combination test. We then convert sample permuted QTL maps from each data set to locus-specific P-values, combine them, and order the best genome-wide combined Pvalues from these samples to define the null distribution of genome-wide adjusted P-values.
Previous efforts to meta-analyze different mapping populations have included taking the best P-value for each QTL interval and combining these values using Fisher's combination test [6] to assess the combined likelihood of ethanol drinking QTLs between C57BL/6J and DBA/2J. Unfortunately, this approach does not really increase the resolution of the QTL map, though it does improve confidence that a QTL exists in the region. Positionspecific combination of QTL maps using Fisher's combination test was, however, used earlier to combine data from two different recombinant inbred (RI) strain sets [7] where the same markers were typed or could be inferred, though calculation of genomewide adjusted significance was not considered.
Province [8] describes a correction necessary to account for truncated LOD scores in combining QTL data with the clear application of position-specific data combination by simple addition of LOD scores. Other recent investigations have used a variety of approaches to integrating genetic mapping data including standardizing common phenotypes between crosses, [9] multiple cross mapping (MCM), a method of identifying haplotype blocks that segregate as expected in an initially defined QTL interval among multiple strains, [10] and incorporation of additional data on gene density, identity [11] and expression [12].
A more recent paper by Li and colleagues [13] describes combination of multiple crosses using cross as a covariate, and outlines a permutation method that retains stratification of phenotypes by cross for determining genome-wide significance, which should work well when simple shuffling of genotypes and phenotypes within cross is sufficient to provide appropriate randomization within data set. Our approach provides a general method of integrating data even when this is not the case, for instance with Advanced Intercross Lines (AILs), [14], recombinant inbred intercrosses (RIX), and heterogeneous stocks (HS). Our approach can also be used for intercrosses (F2), backcrosses (N2), RIs and other datasets and is a simple method of integrating results from studies using individually tailored approaches like composite interval mapping. These methods can be used in a complementary manner by combining appropriate crosses using the method of Li and co-workers [13] and integrating other data sets using our method.
Our simple method also has the advantage of not requiring adjustment for use with crosses that represent different numbers of effective tests across the genome. For instance, the number of independent tests represented by an RI strain set will be greater than the number represented by a standard F2, since the genetic length of the RI genome is four times that of the F2 genome. [15] AIL and HS data sets may have even more extreme expansions of the genetic length of their genomes. Since a permuted QTL map is sampled from each permuted data set and combined in the same way as in the original combined data set, the effective number of tests in the permutations will be equivalent to that in the original data, so the genome-wide adjustment will be valid.

RESULTS


Distribution of locus-specific P-values

Under the null hypothesis of no genetic effect at a locus, the distribution of P-values should be constant with a range of 0 to 1 [16]. In fact, across permutations at a given locus this is enforced in the locus-specific P-value computation by ranking of values at each locus between permutations, which results in an even distribution of values at each position. In the permutations, where no locus should be associated with a real genetic effect, this should be the case among loci as well, and the distribution of P-values for each permutation should also be constant and range from 0 to 1. This is the case in a variety of tested permutations (RI, F2, and AIL populations) at tested markers. Interpolation of P-values between markers does seem to slightly reduce the number of Pvalues observed at the very low and high ends of the distribution, however.

The value of locus-specific P-values

In large data sets with independent observations-most F2 populations, for instance-the distribution of P-values under the null hypothesis of no linkage is approximately the same for each analyzed locus in the genome. The equivalent distribution of Pvalues by locus under the null hypothesis means that any two positions in the genome are equally likely to be the best P-value in the genome in a given permutation of an original data set. This assumption does not always hold in small data sets such as RI populations and populations with non-independent observations such as AILs. (Fig. 1) For consistency, however, we calculate locusspecific P-values for all data considered in this paper.
Locus-specific P-values and missing data fEven when using Sen and Churchill's imputation [17] for missing genotypes, the effect of missing data is apparent in the permuted distribution of locus-specific P-values derived from simple reshuffling permutations such as SimplePerm.py, described above. There is a correlation (r = 0.52) between number of fraction of missing genotypes for both the classic C57BL/6J (B6) x DBA/2J (D2) RI (BXD RI) strains from The Jackson Laboratory and the new BXD RI strains [18]. Dropping imputation for missing genotypes results in an even higher (r = 0.73) for correlation with the fraction of missing data. Where genotypes themselves are being permuted and reconstructed, for instance with AIL data, there is no significant correlation between permuted locus-specific LOD score distribution and missing data in the original data set. Figure 1. The need for locus-specific P-values. The 95% LOD score (the LOD score equivalent to a locus-specific P = 0.05) was calculated using 10,000 permutations for markers on Chr. 1 for body weight in several different populations. Each marker is indicated by a dot with connecting lines interpolated between adjacent markers. TJL BXD are BXD strains available from The Jackson Laboratory (The BXD strains developed by Taylor and colleagues [26,27]). New BXD are the recently developed BXD strains currently resident at UTHSC. [18] Note that the maximum and minimum values of the 95 th percentile LOD score vary considerably for the AIL population, somewhat for the RI (New BXD and TJL BXD) populations, (predicted by missing data pattern) and very little for the 183 member F2 population tested. (There are only three widely spaced markers genotyped for the F2 population on Chr. 1, so the interpolation between points should not be interpreted as a meaningful line. However, markers on all chromosomes were very similar, between a 95% LOD of 1.2 and 1.4.) doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001036.g001
Composite significance and intervals of Hipp1a and Hipp9a
As an example of the composite mapping method, we mapped bilateral hippocampus weight in two populations, each of which has already been individually reported [14,19]. Hipp1a was originally reported as significant in the BXD strain set [19]. As the re-mapping of hippocampus weight QTLs in Fig. 2 shows, we see a significant QTL on Chr. 1, but we also see a non-significant indication of a QTL on Chr. 9. (best locus-wise P = 0.001). This second QTL is individually significant in an AI population [14]. (Note that, for each population the best possible P-value is P,0.0002 since 5000 permutations were done. It may be possible to further improve composite resolution using much larger permutations.) In the case of Hipp1a the 1-LOD support interval (taken here as rough measure of confidence interval) is 34 Mb in the BXD strains, 17.5 Mb for the AIL, and the composite map is slightly better at 16.5 Mb, an average 51% improvement over the individual maps. For Hipp9a the interval was 24.5 Mb for the BXDs, 21.5 Mb for the AILs, and only 14.5 Mb for the composite map-an average improvement of 37% over the individual mapping efforts.

DISCUSSION

We have developed and implemented a simple method for combining QTL mapping results from multiple QTL experiments. The ready availability of dense marker maps and physical positions as well as genetic positions for markers facilitates incorporation of positional information. This method can therefore be used not only to report combined probability of the existence of a QTL locus more accurately than simply combining the best P-values for multiple mapping approaches [6]. It is also a valuable fine mapping technique and can be used in conjunction with almost any high-resolution mapping method [1][2][3][4][5] as well as for combination of multiple low-resolution mapping efforts. . This figure shows mapping data for the hippocampus weight loci Hipp1a and Hipp9a using 34 BXD strains (BXD; shaded line) and 679 advanced intercross animals (AIL, thin solid line) as well as the composite map using the described method (thick solid line). The genome-wide adjusted composite P = 0.05 threshold is 2log P = 3.5 (dark solid horizontal line). Since 5000 permutations were used for each data set, the maximum 2log P,3.7 (graphed as 2log P = 3.7 for convenience) for each individual data set, so increasing the number of permutations might increase the peak combined value and slightly improve the range of the combined interval. Bars underneath the peaks are labeled AIL, BXD, and combined to indicate the l-LOD support interval of these mapping populations. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001036.g002

Narrowing intervals by combining mapping populations

We have demonstrated that notable improvements in genome-wide significance and QTL confidence interval are possible using our method by using the example of two hippocampus weight loci. With only two mapping populations for this phenotype, we saw improvements of 37% to 51%, in 1-LOD confidence intervals. The extensible nature of the method means that any number of available mapping populations can be added to further improve the results.
In addition, combining loci that are barely significant or narrowly miss the criteria for significance in multiple populations can clearly lead to strong observations of new loci or improved confidence in previously known loci. For instance, combining mapping results at a locus significant at a point-wise P = 0.05 for seven mapping populations or P = 0.01 for three mapping populations results in a P combined = 0.0001, which is very likely significant genome-wide. Results from small mapping populations generated using the same parental strains can therefore profitably be combined using this method. Combining suggestive results (P = 0.001) with small additional results (P = 0.01) also generates much improved composite results. (P combined = 0.00012)

Crosses in multiple strains and phenotypes

While we have concentrated on multiple crosses using the same progenitor strains, it would be simple to extend this method to include crosses in other strains or, for that matter, other phenotypes measured in independent crosses. The implicit assumption in these situations is that measurement of an equivalent trait is occurring despite the cross or phenotype difference. In the case of multiple strains, this means the allele difference causing the QTL occurs in the same gene between the strains crossed in each population. Populations such as the BXD, BXA/AXB, CXB, and BXH RI strain sets, when the common allele (B6) may differ from the other strains, could fall in this category. In the case of multiple phenotypes (which could also be in multiple strains) the assumption is that the phenotypes are measuring the effect of the same polymorphism between progenitor strains for the cross.

The importance of physical position

Genetic positions are necessary for generating QTL maps using methods such as interval mapping [20,21]. Ultimately, however, the desired result of a QTL map is assignment of a probability that a given segment of DNA, a physical position, is involved in a phenotype. Additionally, genetic positions vary between crosses, while physical positions are constant-a desirable property when comparing between crosses is the fundamental goal.
Assigning a P-value to a physical position requires interpolation of physical positions for markers (and intermediate markers generated in interval mapping) with unknown physical positions. It also requires interpolation between these markers and the regular, set physical positions that are ultimately reported. For dense marker maps such as those typical of RI strains, the assumption that intermediate physical position can be linearly interpolated from genetic positions and flanking physical positions is reasonable. Some caution may be appropriate, however, when interpolating physical positions for widely spaced markers.

Incorporating non-locus-specific P-values

Since locus-specific P-values are not required in the case of sufficiently large RI sets, intercrosses (F2), and backcrosses (N2), the process of explicitly computing QTL maps for each data set and performing the permutation described could be approximated by deriving P-values for each position in some more generic manner, for example from the LOD score, and combining these values as described to generate composite QTL maps and genome-wide thresholds. This is particularly useful when a simple cross with highly significant loci is being considered since the software used to sort P-values (OutParser.py) runs in approximately N 2 time with respect to number of permutations. When converting LODs to P-values, however, under the null hypothesis of no linkage, approximately half the genome will be associated with LOD = 0 (because LODs are constrained to be positive in typical QTL maps) which should equate to P>0.72 [8].

Approximation of genome-wide P-value thresholds

When the distribution of permuted P-values across the genome is uniform, combination of multiple P-values for each locus should result in a uniform combined P-value distribution across the genome. We verified this empirically using a simple simulation, sampling and combining multiple observations from uniform distributions over 1000 permutations. Since in the ideal case each combined permuted QTL map will have a P-value distribution equivalent to a simple permuted QTL map, existing analytical [22] methods for estimating genome-wide P-value thresholds may be applicable where genetic lengths of the data sets being combined are similar. In most such cases, the distribution of permuted P-values is fairly uniform, so analytically determined cutoffs should provide reasonably good estimates. When a genomewide permuted P-value is not required, the final step of combining P-values takes only a few seconds.

Multiple mapping results from a single population

While any number of independent results can be combined using our method, it is problematic to include mapping results from the same reference population even when phenotyping was entirely independent. For instance, directly combining more than one QTL map from the same RI or congenic population is problematic. Instead it might be practical to combine the data gathered on the population as appropriate and generate a single QTL map from the combined data. This map could then be combined with any other independent mapping experiments using our method.

Incorporation of congenic data

This method can be extended to incorporate data from a variety of data sources, including congenic and consomic data. For a polygenic trait, a test of whether a modifying locus from the introgressed parent is present in a given congenic segment addresses only the association of that region and does not contain information about the rest of the genome.
One simple approximate solution is to assume that the LOD = 0 for the remainder of the genome and apply Province's method (2001) to convert to P > 0.72. This is a highly conservative assumption as our actual expectation is that there will be linkage in other parts of the genome as well for a complex trait. Fortunately, Fisher's combination test does not penalize too heavily for failure to observe association. P values for permutations could also be simulated by assigning a P-value, evenly distributed between 0 and 1, to each point outside the congenic interval. In situations where multiple congenics exist, combining the congenic interval results as a single data source might also be a reasonable approach.

The importance of raw data archives

If meta-analysis of QTLs is limited to simple combination of maximum significance values for a QTL interval, the common practice of reporting QTL significance in terms of this maximum and of providing a figure representing the QTL interval is sufficient. For position specific analyses with joint determination of genome-wide significance thresholds, however, it is important to have access to the original data as well as the specific parameters used to perform the data analysis. Unfortunately, particularly in the older QTL literature, public access to the primary data was seldom a requirement of publication. The authors would strongly advocate that journals require public access to such data both to facilitate transparency and reproduction of results and to facilitate more sophisticated meta-analyses. All data used in generating the results for this paper is available at http://www.nervenet.org/ papers/CombineQTL.html or archived at www.genenetwork.org.

Summary

This method is a simple, easily extensible means of combining QTL mapping results from a wide variety of mapping efforts, and complements other fine mapping methods. The major advantages of this method are its simplicity, incorporation of physical position data and locus-specific P-values, and empirically estimated genome-wide P-value thresholds.

METHODS


Assigning P-values associated with physical positions

The first step in generating a composite QTL map is to assign Pvalues to regular physical positions on the genome. This is done using permuted QTL maps processed to determine locus-specific P-values as described below. The details of the permutation required to generate the permuted maps are assumed to have been worked out before data is combined.
We use locus-specific P-values because in certain data sources such as advanced intercrosses and small RI sets, the correspondence between the likelihood typically reported in mapping output (a LOD score for R/qtl, [23] for instance, or a LRS score in the case of WebQTL [24,25]) and the P-value, as determined by generation of permuted QTL maps, is not constant with respect to position. This can be related to missing data patterns, distribution of alleles and non-syntenic association.
Once all of the permuted maps are generated, we assign locusspecific p-values to regularly spaced physical positions on each chromosome for the original data. In order to derive locus-specific P-values from raw LOD scores we let be the observed LOD at locus j. For each permutation, L perm (i,j) is the observed LOD at locus j in permutation replicate i. The locus-specific P-value for locus j is P(j) = proportion{ L perm (i,j)'L obs (j)}. This is the proportion of the permutation replicates that have a LOD score greater than or equal to the observed LOD score at locus j.
P-values at regular intervals were based on the known physical and genetic positions of markers and their P-values as computed above. First we linearly interpolated missing physical positions using flanking genetic positions for the nearest markers with complete information (assuming 0 cM and 0 Mb for the proximal end of the chromosome and assuming linear extension for the distal end of the chromosome using the ratio of physical to genetic distance of the nearest proximal markers.) After we obtained a complete set of physical positions, we linearly interpolated P values at regular intervals on a grid of physical positions, allowing values from the final marker to the end of the chromosome to equal those at the final marker.
For sparsely genotyped data sets it is more accurate to linearly interpolate using LOD scores based on an interval map and derive locus-specific P-values from the interpolated LOD scores, though this method is slower than the one described above. As genotype density increases the order of these steps has less effect. We tested the effect of this difference for our BXD RI data at 300 markers and the average percent difference in P-value between methods was only 12%. For all model data sets except our F2 data set, which is sparsely genotyped, we therefore calculated locus-specific P-values first. We provide an implementation for both methods.

Sample data sets and phenotypes

For calculating the LOD score equivalent to a locus-specific P = 0.05 (referred to as 95% LOD) in Fig. 1, we used raw body weight measurements from a previously described intercross [19], as well as other previously described data [19] from the classic BXD recombinant inbred (RI) strains [26,27], which are formed by repeated intercrossing and inbreeding the progeny of C57BL/ 6J and DBA/2J. In addition, we gathered new body weight data for a recently described [18] set of BXD RI strains and from an advanced intercross [14] using similar criteria.
For composite mapping of hippocampus weight QTLs shown in Fig. 2, we used previously described observations in the classic BXD RI strains [19] and observations made using the same protocol from an advanced intercross, the construction of which is described elsewhere [14]. For this example of combined mapping data, we used the method and software described below.

Combining QTL data sources

At the end of the process outlined above, each data source will be represented by a set of locus-specific P-values associated with regular and defined physical positions. For each of these positions, j, there will be k associated P-values, one from each data source. Since by Fisher's combination test 22 S ln P(k,j) for all k data sources at locus j follows a chi-squared distribution with 2k degrees of freedom in the case of the null hypothesis, (no association between phenotype and genotype) we can easily associate each position with a composite locus-wise P-value, P combined (j).

Generating genome-wide P-value thresholds

The combined map gives us a locus-specific combined P-value for any given locus, P combined (j), but it is also important to have a genome-wide threshold for error control at a specified genomewide P-value. Genome-wide LOD score thresholds for QTL experiments are typically generated by permuting genotype or phenotype, re-running the mapping phase of the experiment for a large number of permutations [28], and creating an ordered list of the highest LOD score in each permutation. The genome-wide adjusted P-value is the proportion of this ordered list that is greater than or equal to a given LOD score in the original QTL map.
The approach here is similar except that we are first converting LOD scores to P-values for each permutation i. This is done as described above except that observed LOD score at locus j, is the value of the LOD score for a particular permutation in i, designated i fixed, for which locus-specific P-values are currently being calculated. We will term the LOD score for i fixed at locus j L(i fixed ,j) and will designate the permuted LOD scores for all permutations except i fixed as L perm (i',j). This process is an excellent approximation of the locusspecific P-value that would result from generating a set of permutations of each i fixed , assuming that L perm (i',j) has a distribution equivalent to L perm (i,j), which should be true for large i.
In other words, for each permutation in i, the locus-specific Pvalue at j is P(i fixed, j)~proportionfL perm (i,j) §L(i fixed, j)g:
After calculating locus specific P-values for all i permutations at all j positions, P(i,j), in all k data sets, we can estimate the genomewide adjusted P-value. We do this by sampling a permuted map of locus specific P-values, P(i), for each of k data sets and calculating the combined P-value, P perm, combined (j), for each corresponding locus between sampled permuted maps as described above using Fisher's combination test.
We then record the minimum P perm, ombined (j) value from each combined map. This permutation is repeated to create an ordered list of best P-values, P best . For a given P combined (j) value in the original data set, the genome-wide adjusted P-value, P adjusted , for the combined data is P adjusted (j)~ProportionfP best §P combined (j)g Typically, however, the ordered list is simply used to calculate a genome-wide threshold, often set the 95 th percentile value for P best (genome-wide adjusted P = 0.05).

Software

All software described is available at http://www.nervenet.org/ papers/CombineQTL.html. For the customized analyses above, we wrote scripts using Python 2.4 as well as simple R scripts to automate use of R/qtl. Further integration with R/qtl as well as other QTL mapping programs should be relatively straightforward, providing that automation of the mapping functionality itself is achievable as it is with R/qtl. Permutations generated for advanced intercross lines were created using a custom python script designed for the purpose, the operation of which is described elsewhere [14]. Permutation of populations with independent samples, such as F2, N2, and RI (phenotypic averages) populations can all be accomplished by simply shuffling the list of phenotypes. A Python script that does this and writes a file of permuted phenotypes, SimplePerm.py, is included.
We wrote a set of two Python scripts, OutParser.py, and OutParserLI.py to parse the mapping output files from R/qtl and to generate a map of locus-specific P-values at regular, user defined intervals on a physical scale. These versions differ only in that OutParser.py calculates locus-specific P-values at markers then interpolates to regular positions, while OutParserLI.py (LOD Interval) reverses the order of these steps. OutParserLI.py is somewhat slower but preferable for sparsely genotyped data sets. These scripts require a data file, markerphyspos.txt in the example files, which contains genetic positions for each marker (and/or interpolated marker if interval mapping has been performed) in the R/qtl output file as well as physical positions for as many markers as possible. Because the locus-specific Pvalues will often be used in combination with a similar set of values, defined at the same intervals, in another population (see description of CombineMaps.py below), the P values at the ends of each chromosome must be handled carefully. (If different data sources are associated with different markers, the beginning and ending points of each chromosome may well be different.) The assumption we have made is to repeat the most proximal actual marker value to the most proximal end of a given chromosome and likewise to repeat the most distal value to the distal end. Further, each chromosome is defined as 200 Mb in length (This is just slightly longer than the longest actual mouse chromosome. The user can adjust this value.) to ensure that values from each new data set can be easily accommodated and to eliminate the need for a separate file specifying length of each chromosome. This is also a convenient convention for plotting composite maps as the ''unused'' regions can be easily masked and graphs from multiple data sources, which may differ slightly in chromosome length and markers, can easily be lined up and overlaid.
CombineMaps.py combines QTL maps of locus-specific Pvalues from different data sources. In order to generate combined maps of original data the program simply applies Fisher's combination test to the locus-specific P-values at equivalent physical positions for each defined position in the genome. The program also implements the method described above for finding genome-wide adjusted P-values. It does this by sampling with replacement from the set of permuted QTL maps for each data source. These maps are combined as described above and the best combined locus-specific P-value is recorded. This list of best Pvalues can be sorted (easily done in Excel or in Unix using ''sort -n filename.sortedfilename'') to allow genome-wide interpretation of locus-specific P-values.

Figure 2 .

2Combined mapping for Hipp1a and Hipp9a
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
October 2007 | Issue 10 | e1036
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSWe thank Arthur Centeno for computer support, Amanda E. Birmingham for assistance in optimization and presentation of the associated software, and Pamela Franklin for administrative assistance.Author Contributions
Advanced intercross lines, an experimental population for fine genetic mapping. A Darvasi, M Soller, Genetics. 141Darvasi A, Soller M (1995) Advanced intercross lines, an experimental population for fine genetic mapping. Genetics 141: 1199-1207.
Quantitative trait locus analysis using recombinant inbred intercrosses (RIX): theoretical and empirical considerations. F Zou, J A Gelfond, D C Airey, L Lu, K F Manly, Genetics. Zou F, Gelfond JA, Airey DC, Lu L, Manly KF, et al. (2005) Quantitative trait locus analysis using recombinant inbred intercrosses (RIX): theoretical and empirical considerations. Genetics.
Genome-tagged mice (GTM): two sets of genome-wide congenic strains. O A Iakoubova, C L Olsson, K M Dains, D A Ross, A Andalibi, Genomics. 74Iakoubova OA, Olsson CL, Dains KM, Ross DA, Andalibi A, et al. (2001) Genome-tagged mice (GTM): two sets of genome-wide congenic strains. Genomics 74: 89-104.
Mapping of quantitative trait loci with knockout/congenic strains. V J Bolivar, M N Cook, L Flaherty, Genome Res. 11Bolivar VJ, Cook MN, Flaherty L (2001) Mapping of quantitative trait loci with knockout/congenic strains. Genome Res 11: 1549-1552.
Experimental strategies for the genetic dissection of complex traits in animal models. A Darvasi, Nat Genet. 18Darvasi A (1998) Experimental strategies for the genetic dissection of complex traits in animal models. Nat Genet 18: 19-24.
The replicability of QTLs for murine alcohol preference drinking behavior across eight independent studies. J K Belknap, A L Atkins, Mamm Genome. 12Belknap JK, Atkins AL (2001) The replicability of QTLs for murine alcohol preference drinking behavior across eight independent studies. Mamm Genome 12: 893-899.
Natural variation in neuron number in mice is linked to a major quantitative trait locus on Chr 11. R W Williams, R C Strom, D Goldowitz, J Neurosci. 18Williams RW, Strom RC, Goldowitz D (1998) Natural variation in neuron number in mice is linked to a major quantitative trait locus on Chr 11. J Neurosci 18: 138-146.
The significance of not finding a gene. M A Province, Am J Hum Genet. 69Province MA (2001) The significance of not finding a gene. Am J Hum Genet 69: 660-663.
Combined analyses of data from quantitative trait loci mapping studies. Chromosome 4 effects on porcine growth and fatness. G A Walling, P M Visscher, L Andersson, M F Rothschild, L Wang, Genetics. 155Walling GA, Visscher PM, Andersson L, Rothschild MF, Wang L, et al. (2000) Combined analyses of data from quantitative trait loci mapping studies. Chromosome 4 effects on porcine growth and fatness. Genetics 155: 1369-1378.
Multiple cross mapping (MCM) markedly improves the localization of a QTL for ethanol-induced activation. R Hitzemann, B Malmanger, S Cooper, S Coulombe, C Reed, Genes Brain Behav. 1Hitzemann R, Malmanger B, Cooper S, Coulombe S, Reed C, et al. (2002) Multiple cross mapping (MCM) markedly improves the localization of a QTL for ethanol-induced activation. Genes Brain Behav 1: 214-222.
Multiple cross and inbred strain haplotype mapping of complex-trait candidate genes. Y G Park, R Clifford, K H Buetow, K W Hunter, Genome Res. 13Park YG, Clifford R, Buetow KH, Hunter KW (2003) Multiple cross and inbred strain haplotype mapping of complex-trait candidate genes. Genome Res 13: 118-121.
A strategy for the integration of QTL, gene expression, and sequence analyses. R Hitzemann, B Malmanger, C Reed, M Lawler, B Hitzemann, Mamm Genome. 14Hitzemann R, Malmanger B, Reed C, Lawler M, Hitzemann B, et al. (2003) A strategy for the integration of QTL, gene expression, and sequence analyses. Mamm Genome 14: 733-747.
Combining data from multiple inbred line crosses improves the power and resolution of quantitative trait loci mapping. R Li, M A Lyons, H Wittenburg, B Paigen, G A Churchill, Genetics. 169Li R, Lyons MA, Wittenburg H, Paigen B, Churchill GA (2005) Combining data from multiple inbred line crosses improves the power and resolution of quantitative trait loci mapping. Genetics 169: 1699-1709.
Genome Reshuffling for Advanced Intercross Line Permutation. J L Peirce, K W Broman, L Lu, E J Chesler, G Zhou, submittedPeirce JL, Broman KW, Lu L, Chesler EJ, Zhou G, et al. Genome Reshuffling for Advanced Intercross Line Permutation. submitted.
Inbreeding and linkage. Jbs Haldane, C H Waddington, Genetics. 16Haldane JBS, Waddington CH (1931) Inbreeding and linkage. Genetics 16: 357-374.
Statistical methods for research workers. R Fisher, Oliver and LloydLondonFisher R (1925) Statistical methods for research workers. London: Oliver and Lloyd.
A statistical framework for quantitative trait mapping. S Sen, G A Churchill, Genetics. 159Sen S, Churchill GA (2001) A statistical framework for quantitative trait mapping. Genetics 159: 371-387.
A new set of BXD recombinant inbred lines from advanced intercross populations in mice. J L Peirce, L Lu, J Gu, L M Silver, R W Williams, BMC Genet. 57Peirce JL, Lu L, Gu J, Silver LM, Williams RW (2004) A new set of BXD recombinant inbred lines from advanced intercross populations in mice. BMC Genet 5: 7.
Complex trait analysis of the hippocampus: mapping and biometric analysis of two novel gene loci with specific effects on hippocampal structure in mice. L Lu, D C Airey, R W Williams, J Neurosci. 21Lu L, Airey DC, Williams RW (2001) Complex trait analysis of the hippocampus: mapping and biometric analysis of two novel gene loci with specific effects on hippocampal structure in mice. J Neurosci 21: 3503-3514.
Mapping mendelian factors underlying quantitative traits using RFLP linkage maps. E S Lander, D Botstein, Genetics. 121Lander ES, Botstein D (1989) Mapping mendelian factors underlying quantitative traits using RFLP linkage maps. Genetics 121: 185-199.
Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM algorithm. A P Dempster, N M Laird, D B Rubin, J Roy Statist Soc B. 39Dempster AP, Laird NM, Rubin DB (1977) Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM algorithm. J Roy Statist Soc B 39: 1-38.
Genetic dissection of complex traits: guidelines for interpreting and reporting linkage results. E Lander, L Kruglyak, Nat Genet. 11Lander E, Kruglyak L (1995) Genetic dissection of complex traits: guidelines for interpreting and reporting linkage results. Nat Genet 11: 241-247.
R/qtl: QTL mapping in experimental crosses. K W Broman, H Wu, S Sen, G A Churchill, Bioinformatics. 19Broman KW, Wu H, Sen S, Churchill GA (2003) R/qtl: QTL mapping in experimental crosses. Bioinformatics 19: 889-890.
WebQTL: rapid exploratory analysis of gene expression and genetic networks for brain and behavior. E J Chesler, L Lu, J Wang, R W Williams, K F Manly, Nat Neurosci. 7Chesler EJ, Lu L, Wang J, Williams RW, Manly KF (2004) WebQTL: rapid exploratory analysis of gene expression and genetic networks for brain and behavior. Nat Neurosci 7: 485-486.
WebQTL: web-based complex trait analysis. J Wang, R W Williams, K F Manly, Neuroinformatics. 1Wang J, Williams RW, Manly KF (2003) WebQTL: web-based complex trait analysis. Neuroinformatics 1: 299-308.
Recombinant inbred strains. B A Taylor, Genetic Variants and Strains of the Laboratory Mouse. Lyon ML, Searle AGOxford; Oxford UPTaylor BA (1989) Recombinant inbred strains. In: Lyon ML, Searle AG, eds. Genetic Variants and Strains of the Laboratory Mouse. Oxford: Oxford UP. pp 773-796.
Genotyping new BXD recombinant inbred mouse strains and comparison of BXD and consensus maps. B A Taylor, C Wnek, B S Kotlus, N Roemer, T Mactaggart, Mamm Genome. 10Taylor BA, Wnek C, Kotlus BS, Roemer N, MacTaggart T, et al. (1999) Genotyping new BXD recombinant inbred mouse strains and comparison of BXD and consensus maps. Mamm Genome 10: 335-348.
Empirical threshold values for quantitative trait mapping. G A Churchill, R W Doerge, Genetics. 138Churchill GA, Doerge RW (1994) Empirical threshold values for quantitative trait mapping. Genetics 138: 963-971.
