Neurons and their target cells appear to interact in a complex reciprocal manner. These interactions have been most readily established in the neuromuscular system, where denervation results in numerous changes in muscle cell physiology {{45013459}}{{not_in_s2orc}}, in the visual system, where spatial and temporal relationships influence retinotectal innervation patterns {{36539243}}{{not_in_s2orc}}, and in the sympathetic nervous system, where the postganglionic axonal pathways appear to subserve bidirectionally significant regu-latory processes {{not_in_s2orc}}{{30230624}}{{43891205}}. While these types of interactions may be mediated by neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine, or by larger molecules, such as nerve growth factor, the constraints imposed in vivo by the close physical association between cells whose interactions are demonstrable, militate against characterization of the trophic molecules involved. In contrast, the study of interacting cell systems in vitro obviates this difficulty and, as a result, a variety of techniques-circumfu- {{81726630}} TrtE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY 9 VOLUME 74, 1977 9 pages {{81726630}}{{84653251}}{{19178054}}{{not_in_s2orc}}{{43891205}}{{4148984}}{{45817370}}{{not_in_s2orc}}{{not_in_s2orc}}{{not_in_s2orc}}{{not_in_s2orc}}{{not_in_s2orc}}{{not_in_s2orc}}{{not_in_s2orc}} sion {{84653251}}, extract addition {{not_in_s2orc}}{{11925495}}{{24070142}}, and coculture {{20829354}}{{85966459}}{{4148984}}-have been successfully applied to cultured cells. The objectives of such approaches have included the identification of significant interactions between different cell types and the characterization of the molecular events mediating these interactions. Because of the possibility that responses observed in vitro result from requirements peculiar to the cell culture conditions, the ultimate significance of such studies may be derived from an extension of these observations, once defined, to in vivo systems.
Using the co-culture approach to study the interactions between murine spinal cord (SC) cells and skeletal muscle, we have observed (4) an increase with time in the number of detectable synaptic interactions between nerve and muscle cells and marked increases in the activity of choline acetyltransferase (CAT, EC 2.3.1.6), the enzyme which mediates the synthesis of the neuromuscular transmitter, acetylcholine. The increased CAT activity was shown not to be due to a general facilitation of cell survival since the activity of the four other enzymes assayed as well as total culture protein and DNA were relatively unaffected by the co-culture conditions. The survival of morphologically identified presumptive neurons was similar whether the cells were grown alone or with muscle {{22465705}}. The objective of the present study was to examine this interaction between cultured SC and muscle in terms of (a) the quantitative relationships between muscle and nerve, (b) the effects of co-culture on another neurotransmitterrelated enzyme, glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), and (c) the stimulation of a similar increase in SC cell CAT activity by a factor(s) released by muscle into its culture medium.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cultures

Pregnant C57B1/6 mice were obtained from the National Institutes of Health colony or from Microbiological Associates (Bethesda, Md.). SC cultures were produced from mouse embryos at 12-14 days in utero; heart (atrium) and skeletal muscle cell cultures were made from term embryos. The adult mice were anesthetized with CO2 or chloroform and sacrificed by cervical dislocation. Uteri containing the embryos were removed, placed in sterile 60-ram plastic petri dishes (Falcon) containing DISGH, a mixture of 50 ml of D1 concentrate (Colorado Serum Co., Denver, Colo.), 20 g sucrose, and 1 g glucose with 10 mM N-hydroxyethylpiperazine N'-2-ethane sulfonic acid (HEPES, Calbiochem, San Diego, Calif.) in 1 liter (320-330 mosmol, adjusted to pH 7.2 with NaOH). The embryos were removed under a dissecting microscope and transferred to a fresh dish containing DISGH. The desired tissue was quickly dissected, washed in fresh DISGH, and transferred to an empty 35-ram plastic petri dish. Unless otherwise stated, about one-half of the meninges and dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) were left attached to the spinal cords. Complete hindlimbs minus skin, bone, and feet were used for skeletal muscle cultures. The tissue from either source was finely minced with iridectomy scissors and treated at 37~ for 20-30 min (SC) or 40 min (muscle) with 0.25% crude trypsin (Grand Island Biological Co., Grand Island, N. Y.) in DISGH. The tissue pieces from four or five cords were transferred to a tube containing 1.5 ml of complete medium (see below) and disrupted by trituration (about 10 passages through a 9-inch transfer pipette, the tip bore of which had been narrowed by flaming). In some experiments, minced SC tissue was dissociated by trituration alone. The supernatant fluid with cells in suspension was removed and replaced with 1 ml of fresh complete medium and the remaining undissociated tissue was triturated again. This process was repeated until the combined cell suspensions contained 1 ml of medium per SC, heart, or hindlimb.
The hindlimb suspension was enriched for myoblasts by preplating for 20 min in 60-mm diameter plastic culture dishes. Unattached cells were then filtered through 130-tzm-pore nylon mesh (Nitex, Silk Screen Supplies, Inc., Brooklyn, N. Y.) to remove undissociated tissue. At this stage of preparation the tissue suspensions contained predominantly single cells with rare 2-to 10-cell dumps. The cells were more than 90% viable as determined by nigrosin stain exclusion. Except as noted in the individual experiments, 3 • 10 e SC cells or 0.7-0.8 x 108 skeletal muscle cells were inoculated per 60-mm dish, while 1 x 10 e SC cells or 0.25 x l0 s muscle cells were plated on 35-ram dishes. Heart cells were not counted; 3 ml of the suspension (equivalent to three embryonic hearts) were plated per 60-mm dish. All culture dishes were coated with a thin, air-dried film of acid-soluble, calf skin collagen (A grade, Caibiochem).
Myoblast-flbroblast cultures were prepared from muscle cultures by multiple subculturings (using trypsin) to remove the myotubes. In some experiments, cells from established muscle cultures were added to SC cultures or pooled to produce cultures with more myotubes per dish. For these experiments, the myotube cultures were removed from the dishes by incubation for I/e h at 37~ in DISGH containing 10% heat-inactivated horse serum and 1 mg/ml collagenase (Worthington Biochemical Corp., Freehold, N. J., 449 U/mg). This procedure, in contrast to subculture with trypsin, did not destroy the myotubes. All cultures used for a given experiment came from the same cell suspension.
Medium

The medium used for a given set of cultures was either DMEM: the high glucose formation (Grand Island Biological Co.) of the Dulbecco-Vogt modification of Ea-GILLER ET AL. Choline Acetyltransferase Activity of Spinal Cord Cell Cultures gle's medium with 10% heat-inactivated (56~ for 30 min) horse serum (selected lots from Grand Island Biological Co. or Colorado Serum Co.), or MEM: Eagle's minimal essential medium with final concentrations of 30.3 mM glucose and 44 mM NaHCO3 similarly supplemented with horse serum. The media also included 10% fetal calf serum (Grand Island Biological Co. or Colorado Serum Co.) for the first 6 days of culture. The cultures received 20 ~g/ml of 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine (FUdR) (a gift from Hoffman-LaRoche) and 50 p.g/ml uridine from day 6 to day 8 to prevent overgrowth by background cells. The culture medium was changed every 2-3 days. The cultures were maintained at 36~ in a 10% CO~-90% air, water-saturated atmosphere. Muscle cell cultures were 10 days-2 wk old before nerve ceils were added, and the medium of the muscle cultures was changed immediately before the addition of neuronal cells.
Conditioned medium (CM) was taken from the appropriate cultures after 2-3 days of incubation and transferred to the experimental cultures. The CM was left on the recipient cultures until the next medium change, when the process was repeated. In some experiments, muscle CM was dialyzed at 6~ for 36 h (three changes) against 12 vol of medium with serum and then filtered through a 0.2-t~m-pore diameter membrane (Nalge Co., Rochester, N. Y.) before use on SC cell cultures. To estimate the molecular weight of the active factor, we filtered muscle CM through Diaflow XM-50 membrane filters under nitrogen pressure. The filtrate and an equal volume of CM concentrated above the filter were tested for activity on SC cell cultures.
Harvest and Assay

At appropriate intervals after their initiation, the cultures were rinsed 3 x with Hanks' balanced salt solution and stored at -70~ until harvest. Cells were scraped from dishes, pooled in some instances, sonicated, and diluted for radiochemical assay of CAT and GAD activities {{19178054}}. Enzyme activities were determined in triplicate. Protein was assayed according to a modification of the method of Lowry et al. {{677129}}. Both Nomarski differential interference and phase contrast optics were employed for photomicrography of SC cells grown on collagen-coated glass cover slips.

RESULTS

SC and Muscle Cell Cultures

Cell cultures of dissociated mouse hindlimb muscle closely resembled those obtained from chick {{24682673}}{{not_in_s2orc}} and rat {{40389102}}{{45817370}}. Myoblast division and fusion resulted in the development of multinucleate myotubes within a few days of inoculation. Spontaneous contractile activity was seen by day 7. The myotubes rested on a layer of flat undiffer-entiated cells which continued to divide until the time of FUdR treatment.
Cells cultures of dissociated mouse SC contained phase-bright neuronal cells with extensively branching processes. The neurons could be grouped into three broad morphologic categories: (a) large multipolar cells (Fig. 1 a and b and Fig.  2); (b) large, spherical, often pseudo-unipolar cells (Fig. 1 c) which were observed only when the dorsal sensory ganglia were included in the culture; and (c) small, less well-defined cells which were often observed in clusters (Fig. l b). The cultures also contained a variety of other cell types, including fibroblast-like cells in a basal layer, phase-dark cells with extensive branching processes ( Fig. 1 d), and other less common morphologic types. The development and physiologic characteristics of SC cultures, similar to those used in these experiments, were previously described in work from this laboratory {{1501785}}{{81726630}}. Neurons in these cultures have been found to innervate skeletal muscle. Quite similar morphologic and enzymatic characteristics were observed in cultures from the same inoculum of pooled, dissociated spinal cords. This reliability within each experiment was in contrast to the large variation in CAT activity of control SC cultures often observed between different cell preparations. The results in this report are accordingly presented as comparisons of the effects of various co-culture or CM treatments within groups of cultures obtained from the same inoculum.
SC-Muscle Cell Co-cultures

Morphological maturation of SC ceils during 2 wk of culture without muscle was accompanied by a moderate increase in CAT activity (Fig. 3). When replicate inocula of these SC ceils were cocultured with hindlimb muscle, a marked stimulation of CAT activity was apparent, beginning on the second day; at 14 days, the activity in coculture exceeded that of SC cultured alone by 20fold and the difference was still increasing. In other co-cultures the CAT activity continued to increase for at least 3 wk, the longest interval tested. These data suggest that both the timecourse of CAT development and the total activity achieved were affected by culture with skeletal muscle cells. Because of our inability to assess reliably the relative contribution of SC and muscle to the DNA or protein content of co-cultures, the activities in most instances are expressed per culture. This is justified because the range of total the increase continued at a slower rate in SC cultures but a marked decrease occurred in the cocultures. The C A T activity of these same co-cultures increased steadily through day 21, at which point it was 10-fold greater than in the SC cells cultured alone. This finding supported our previous conclusion (4) that there was considerable specificity in the stimulation of C A T activity when compared to that of other muscle and nervous system enzymes.
Cells from dorsal sensory ganglia were included in most SC cultures because of the extra dissection time required to remove the ganglia which were closely associated with the spinal cords of 12-to 13-day embryos. In one experiment, however, these ganglia were carefully removed during the dissection and the SC cells from the spinal cords alone were cultured with or without muscle cells. After 21 days of culture, SC cell cultures contained C A T activities of 35 pmol/min per dish while the co-cultures contained activities of 498 pmol/min per dish. From this result we conclude that the presence of dorsal sensory ganglion cells is not necessary for the muscle-mediated stimulation of C A T activity.
The data presented in Figs. 5 and 6 were oh-FIGURE 2 An optical section through a large motoneuron-like SC cell obtained with the Nomarski differential -500 interference technique. The culture was grown for 14 days on a collagen-coated glass cover slip. Note the intricate network of fine processes which course through ~ 400 the field. The neuronal nucleus is apparent in the plane of focus. Bar, 50 ttm.
a. 300 C A T activity in replicate SC cell cultures was consistently less than "*15% under similar treatment conditions and, as previously shown (4), normalization of the C A T activity to total culture protein or D N A confirmed the dramatic nature of the co-culture effect. In the experiment presented in Fig. 3, the cultures were also assayed for the activities of acetylcholinesterase, creatine phosphokinase, phosphoglucomutase, myokinase, and phosphorylase. As we have found previously (4), these enzyme activities were not substantially affected by the co-culture condition relative to the magnitude of the C A T activity increase.
The effects of co-culture on SC cell C A T activity contrasted sharply with those on the activity of G A D (EC 4.1.1.15), the enzyme which mediates the synthesis of gamma-aminobutyric acid (Fig.  4). G A D activity increased at similar rates in control and co-cultures through day 7, after which  . Proportionality between dose and response was obtained when the inoculum was increased from 1 x l0 s to 2 x 106 cells. At lower SC cell densities, the increase in CAT activity was greater than proportional; above 2 • l0 s SC cells, the increase was markedly diminished. These data are consistent with the conclusion that the capacity of muscle cell cultures to stimulate SC cell CAT activity was saturable with SC cells. In these same cultures (Fig. 6), it was found that the capacity of muscle cells to decrease the GAD activity could also be affected by the dose of SC cells. The GAD activity of SC cells cultured alone increased with the number of cells inoculated. The co-cultures, at all SC cell doses except the lowest one, contained substantially lower GAD activity than the con-trols. It appeared that the ability of muscle cells to decrease GAD activity was limited and could be partially overcome by large inocula of SC cells.
The contrasting results between the CAT and GAD activities in this experiment (Figs. 5 and 6) argue against nonspecific facilitation either of SC cell plating efficiency or of long-term survival as the source of the increase in co-culture CAT activity. The decrease in GAD activity during co-culture with muscle occurred in three of the five preparations in which GAD assays were performed. Analysis of the records from these five experiments revealed that GAD decreases were found in co-cultures for which SC cells were prepared from 12-to 13-day embryos, but not in cocultures which were prepared from 14-to 15-day embryonic spinal cords.
The degree of stimulation of CAT activity, for replicate SC cell inocula, also varied with the dose of muscle cells used for co-culture (Fig. 7). The relationship was essentially linear when co-cultures were made in the usual manner by inoculation of SC cells onto muscle cultures of different densities (Fig. 7a). After 2 wk of co-culture, CAT activities in the cultures with the largest dose of muscle were 10-fold greater than in cultures without muscle. There was no evidence that the capacity for stimulation of CAT activity in these SC cells had been saturated by this amount of muscle. This muscle dose experiment was also done in a different way, with similar results. Myotubes were removed intact with collagenase treatment from 2wk-old muscle cultures and placed on SC cell cultures 2 days after SC cell inoculation. In such co-cultures, after 1-2 days, the myotubes lay heneath the SC cells and the cultures were indistinguishable from the standard co-cultures. The assays (Fig. 7b) showed that CAT activity was stimulated nearly 10-fold at the highest muscle dose, and that lesser doses of muscle gave less stimulation. Since SC cells normally were adherent to the dishes before day 2, when the myotubes were added, this experiment demonstrated that the CAT stimulation effect was not dependent upon an increase in initial plating efficiency of SC cells due to the presence of muscle cells.
CM Effects

The CAT activity of SC cell cultures could also be stimulated as much as 10-fold by chronic treatment with culture medium which had been conditioned by muscle cell cultures for 2-3 days. The data of Table I   of muscle CM and co-culture. The "myoblastfibroblast" cells of this experiment were obtained by repeated trypsinization and sub-culture of muscle cultures which had not been treated with FUdR; this resulted in the growth of morphologically undifferentiated cells (myoblasts or fibroblasts) in cultures devoid of mature myotubes. Medium conditioned by these cells caused the CAT activity of SC cell cultures to increase twofold, substantially less than the increase in CAT activity in replicate SC cell cultures which was produced by CM from muscle cultures of similar cell density. The extent to which these undifferentiated cells possessed the chemical characteristics of muscle and, alternatively, the degree to which cells and tissues other than muscle may affect SC cell CAT activity remain to be determined. In this experiment (Table I, Exp A), the SC cell GAD activity was not affected by treatment with CM, although co-culture of these SC cells with muscle resulted in substantially reduced GAD activity. The data on protein specific activities of CAT in this experiment and others presented here often indicate a lesser effect on CAT activity than do the data when expressed as enzyme activity per culture. This is due to the fact that the CM treatment often resulted in increases in the protein content of SC cell cultures. This was presumably related to the resumption of cell division by some cells as well as to a continued increase in cell size after the completion of FUdR treatment. Since neurons presumably did not increase in number after inoculation, increases in the protein content of control or experimental cultures appeared to reflect primarily an increase in the number of non-neuronal cells. SC cells co-cultured with skeletal muscle or cardiac muscle had a substantially increased CAT activity which was greater than that of SC cells cultured alone (Table I, Exp B). In these cultures, both GAD and acetylcholinesterase (ACHE) were relatively unaffected. When these SC cells were maintained for 8 days in muscle CM, both the total and specific activities of CAT were increased nearly threefold. No increases in GAD or AChE were detected in the SC cells treated with muscle CM. Growth of SC cells for 12 days in medium conditioned by other SC cultures resulted in increased CAT activity and small increases in GAD and ACHE. The use of different treatment intervals in this experiment makes difficult a direct comparison of the effectiveness of these CM sources, as data below will show that early application of CM is an important determinant in the degree of CAT activity stimulation. However, the CM data in this table show that ceils other than muscle cells probably can condition medium with a factor or factors which accomplish this stimulation.
We found that the increase in CAT activity in SC cell-muscle co-cultures which were also treated with muscle CM was almost precisely equal to the sum of the increases produced by the two treatments administered separately (Table  II, Exp A). If the muscle CM and co-culture were acting to increase CAT activity by the same mechanism, such additivity might have been the result of failure to saturate that mechanism by either treatment. Alternatively, these data are also consistent with the possibility that the two treatments were working through different mechanisms. Since we have as yet been unable to saturate the effect of either CM or muscle coculture treatments, a common mechanism cannot be ruled out. Consistent with a similarity in the mode of action of these treatments was the finding that functional neuromuscular transmission was not required in co-cultures in order to obtain stimulation of CAT activity. Although we had previously shown that there was a temporal relationship between the formation of functional neuromuscular junctions and the development of CAT activity in co-cultures, we found (Table II, Exp B) that the increase in enzyme activity occurred equally well in co-cultures which were chronically maintained in (8.5 • 10 -~ M) abungarotoxin, a snake venom polypeptide which binds to and blocks the muscle acetylcholine receptors. We found that this treatment blocked neuromuscular transmission in these cultures.
The increase in CAT activity was dependent upon the concentration of CM with which the cultures were treated. When SC cells were treated with muscle CM diluted variably with fresh medium (Fig. 8), the increase in enzyme activity which resulted was linearly related to the dose of CM. As mentioned above, we have not yet been able to saturate the CM effect. The increase in CAT activity was also dependent on the length of treatment and the time after initiation of SC cultures at which the CM was first applied (Table III, Exp A). Cultures treated from day 3 to day 10 and given regular medium from day 11 to day 13 had lower CAT activity than did cultures treated with CM continuously from day 3 to day 13. Starting the CM treatment later, after culture inoculation, results in a substantial decrease in the responsiveness of the SC cells, as measured by the increase in CAT activity per day of treatment. Similarly, when either muscle cells or muscle CM was applied to SC cells after several weeks in culture (Table III, Exp B), no increase in CAT activity was detected above that of SC cells cultured alone.
Attempts were made to determine some of the physical characteristics of the factor(s) present in muscle CM which was responsible for increased SC cell CAT activity. Since the horse serum present in the culture medium was routinely heated to 58~ before its use, this temperature was selected to test the thermal stability of the factor(s) in muscle CM. A 20-min treatment of muscle  {{not_in_s2orc}} Effect of muscle cell density on CAT activity increase. In each experiment the amount of muscle in the dishes was calculated by subtracting the total protein in control dishes (no muscle) from that of the combined cultures. Panel a: culture dishes (60 mm) were inoculated with varying amounts of muscle inoculum and grown to myotubes for 9 days before SC cells (0.95 x 105 per cm 2 surface area) were added. The combined cultures, as well as SC and muscle alone controls, were grown for 21 days more and then harvested and assayed for CAT and protein content. Protein content of the SC control dish was 0.60 mg of protein. Each datum represents a single homogenate made from the contents of a single dish. Panel b: mouse myotubes, after 2 wk of culture were removed from dishes by treatment with collagenase, and reinoculated in varying amounts onto 60-mm dishes which contained 2-day-old cultures of SC cells (1.4 • 105 cells/cm z surface area) from 14-day mouse embryos. Combination cultures were then grown for an additional 12 days, harvested, and assayed for CAT and GAD activities and protein content of the dishes. In this experiment GAD activity was not decreased in cultures with muscle. Each datum represents the activity in one homogenate made from the contents of three replicate dishes. The SC control dishes contained an average of 0.64 mg of protein.
CM at that temperature before its application to SC cell cultures did not destroy the activity (Table IV, Exp A); 69% of the effect obtained with unheated CM was still present after heating. Myoblast-fibroblast CM (data not shown) gave similar results. Dialysis of muscle CM for 48 h against three changes of fresh medium also failed to reduce substantially its effectiveness relative to otherwise similarly treated, but nondialyzed, muscle CM (Table IV, Exp B). In this experiment, both the dialyzed and nondialyzed CM were filtered through a membrane with a pore size of 0.2/.tin to ensure postdialysis sterility. We have observed in other experiments that such filtration reduced the effectiveness of the CM for increasing CAT activity; this effect was most significant when the CM was obtained from very dense muscle cultures.
In the experiments reported to this point, SC cultures had been maintained for 11-21 days with and without several changes of CM. Although this approach produced impressive differences between control and CM-treated cultures, it represented a slow, expensive, and inefficient assay method for continued studies of the factor(s) in CM. To obtain a more efficient experimental procedure for bioassay of muscle CM, we began to assay the SC cells after one treatment of 4 days with or without CM. Thus, the data in Table IV show much smaller increases than do those obtained in previous experiments. Using this more rapid assay method, we found that CM which would produce an increase in CAT activity could be obtained from muscle cultures maintained in the absence of horse serum. We had previously determined that horse serum could be omitted from muscle culture medium for at least   Alone  34  -57  On muscle cells  557  16  229  On muscle cells +  515  15 238 a-Btx * SC cells, cultured as described in Materials and Methods, were harvested after 14 days of culture, and each datum represents a determination, in triplicate, of the activity from pooled contents of two cultures in 60-mm dishes. Bungarotoxin (a-Btx) in Exp B was included in the culture medium at 8.5 • 10 -6 M.
tioning, resulted in a 50% increase in the SC CAT activity per culture (Table IV, Exp C). This effect equalled that obtained with medium conditioned in the presence of serum and suggests that conditioning of the medium is not due to a direct detoxification of serum by muscle cell cultures. The fact that CM (no serum) was effective in the assay enabled us to fractionate such CM by filtration on membranes of known pore size without concomitant concentration of serum macromolecules. The muscle CM components which passed through a filter with an approximate molecular weight exclusion limit of 50,000 daltons were inactive in increasing SC cell CAT activity. The CM components which did not pass through this filter were approximately twofold concentrated for high molecular weight molecules and produced an increase in CAT activity per culture that was nearly twice that obtained with untreated muscle CM. The SC cells in this experiment were not treated with FUdR, in contrast to our normal protocol, and, as a result, nonneuronal cell division continued in all of these cultures. Cell growth was apparently stimulated by the CM treatments since the total protein content of these treated cultures was increased. Despite this increase in protein, the CAT specific activity was significantly higher in cultures treated once with CM concentrated for >50,000-dalton macromolecules than in cultures treated with CM from which the high molecular weight components had been removed. These results demonstrate the efficacy of both the single dose bioassay for muscle CM factor(s) and the fractionation Cultures were harvested on day 14 and assayed for CAT activity and protein. Each datum represents CAT activity per dish (circles; presented as equivalent activities for 60-mm diameter dishes) and per milligram of protein (squares) in single homogenates from the contents of 4, 2, 3, or 3 dishes containing 0, 25, 50, and 100% CM, respectively.
of medium conditioned in the absence of serum as useful approaches to the identification of the trophic substance(s) released by muscle which increases CAT activity in SC cell cultures.


CITED_PAPERS:


85966459:CLONAL GROWTH OF MAMMALIAN CELLS IN VITRO


EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

malian serum (S); and Hanks's balanced salt solution, which served as a diluent (D).The pro portions of these three components adopted as a standard are: N, 40 per cent; S, 30 per cent; and D, 30 per cent.We shall refer to a solution of this composition as "complete growth medium."In all experiments in which it is not otherwise specified, the serum employed was a mixture of two parts pooled human 2 to one part horse.To all media penicillin and streptomycin were added as routine, each in concentrations of 100 ~,/ml.When agar was employed, it was first washed (5).All glassware was washed by the procedures which have become standard in tissue culture.Incubation was performed, at 37°C. in fairly tight boxes, flushed continuously with a mixture of 5 per cent CO~ in air, at a rate sufficient to maintain this gas concentration inside the incubator (about 1 complete gas change per hour).Trypsin (obtained from Nutritional Biochemicals Company, under the designation 1-300) was used in 0.25 per cent solution made up in Hanks's saline from which Ca, Mg, and PO4 were omitted.
Definitions.--Adone is a population, all of whose members are descendants from the same single organism.Plating efficiency will be used to denote the per cent of cells set down as described below, which form colonies visible to the unaided eye within 8 days or less.
Growth of Clones with the Aid of Irradiated "Feeder" Cells.-An earlier report (2) described how growth from single HeLa cells can be regularly accomplished by a plating procedure in which the test ceils are placed over a layer of x-irradiated HeLa cells, these latter being unable themselves to multiply, but exhibiting active metabolism.Hence, these non-multiplying cells "condition" the medium so as to permit the single cells to reproduce to the point at which they eventually become serf-sustaining.We have since found it simpler to use an earlier arrangement in which test ceils and feeder cells coexist in the same layer, so that the extra manipulation involved in placing the test cells on a microscope slide resting on top of the "feeder" layer, is eliminated.The current "feeder" procedure is as follows: About 2 X 105 HeLa cells are pipetted on to the bottom of a 60 man.Petri dish, in 4 cc. of complete growth medium.After a period of 5 to 18 hours during which the cells attach to the glass, the dish is x-irradiated with 4,000 to 5,000 r, a dose sufficient to ensure complete suppression of multiplication in all these cells (6).The medium is then removed and replaced with fresh medium containing the cells whose reproductive capacity is to be titrated.These ceils find attachment space between the non-reproducing "feeder" cells, and proceed to grow into colonies during the subsequent incubation period.One medium change after 4 days of incubation usually suffices.As in the 2-layer method, the colony-forming efficiency of healthy HeLa cells is practically 100 per cent.Figs. 1 and 2 illustrate the resulting plates, and Fig. 7 presents a photomicrograph from a typical colony.
While the detailed x-irradiation survival curves of HeLa cells are being presented elsewhere, Fig. 1 demonstrates clearly that an exposure to 4000 r of a plate seeded with 2 X 105 viable HeLa cells does not leave a single survivor s Pooled human serum was obtained from the George Washington Carver Foundation, Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee.capable of forming a macroscopic colony, even though such colonies readily develop if unirradiated cells are subsequently added, as shown in Fig. 2. The completeness of suppression of colony formation from such radiation exposures under the prescribed conditions has been confirmed in many repetitions of such experiments.

Growth of HeLa Clones without the Use of a "Feeder" Layer.-

In our earlier paper we pointed out that the success of the "feeder" principle in producing 100 per cent plating efficiency for HeLa cells proves that each cell possesses the potentiality for initiating unlimited growth, and implies that it is reasonable to expect similar results without a "feeder" system, provided proper conditions could be found.In the absence of specific knowledge of the chemical changes effected by the feeder cells, the desired objective might be attainable by improvement of the metabolic condition of the plated cells and by limiting diffusion processes after plating.The chances of success seemed good since we had demonstrated that deposition of as few as 11 HeLa cells in a microdrop regularly resulted in self-sustaining growth (2).
Study of a variety of factors (like lowering of the 03 tension, which of itself was valueless) eventually led to realization that the standard trypsinization and washing procedure (5, 7) which had been used to disperse the cells subjects them to a considerable trauma that greatly impairs their ability to initiate growth.Other investigators (12) have also pointed out the necessity for gentleness during the trypsinization procedure.We have found that if this procedure is modified, so as to shorten the exposure time to trypsin, minimize mechanical stress, and eliminate all unnecessary washings, single HeLa cells can be regularly grown into large colonies by plating on Petri dishes in the absence of a "feeder" system.The following method for trypsinization and plating (which includes the use of agar when needed) has evolved into a standard procedure in this laboratory:
The nutrient medium is removed from the monolayer of HeLa ceils grown to a confluent sheet in a bottle or Petri dish, and 0.25 per cent trypsin is added in amount sutfcient to cover the cells to about 1 ram. in depth.The vessel is incubated at 37°C. for 15 minutes, with occasional gentle agitation, after which it is immediately cooled to room temperature.(One simple way to hasten this cooling and stop the trypsin action consists in addition of an equal volume of complete growth medium at room temperature at the end of the trypsiuization period.)After a minimal period of agitation by pipetting, to complete dispersal of any dumps, the suspension is either diluted directly in growth medium for plating, or if washing is required by the conditions of the experiment the supernatant is replaced with fresh growth medium by means of a single centrifugatiou at room temperature for 5 minutes at a speed not exceeding 1,000 R.P.M. in an International centrifuge (model SBY No. 1).The absolute cell number is determined by counting with a hemocytometer.Any desired aliquot of this suspension (of which 90 per cent or more of the cells are single) is then transferred to a 60 ram.Petri dish containing 4.5 cc. of growth medium, and the plate is incubated in the CO~ chamber.After about 5 to 15 hours, 0.6 cc. of a 1 per cent solution of washed agar made up in physiological saline may be added.Incubation continues for a total of 8 to 9 days.The purpose of the agar is twofold: By increasing the viscosity of the medium, it decreases loss by diffusion of any necessary metabolites escaping from the cells.In addition, it depresses the tendency of individual cells to migrate which is exhibited by HeLa cells in certain media.Some strains of HeLa cells, when grown in the absence of human serum, form tightly adherent colonies, so that agar is unnecessary.(See Cell and Colonial Morphology below.)It is our feeling that agar aids growth of cells that are not multiplying optimally.
Trypsinization procedures (5,7) which involve much cell agitation and many-fold washings result in extremely low colony-forming efficiency.With intermediate degrees of such cell manipulation, colony formation in the absence of "feeders" yields a plating efficiency in the neighborhood of 50 to 70 per cent.When maximal care is taken with trypsinization, the plating efficiency approaches 100 per cent.Thus, in a representative experiment in which 8 replicate platings each of 200 parental type HeLa cells were performed, the mean colony count was 198 and the standard deviation was 4 per cent of the mean.A typical plating is shown in Fig. 3 and a photomicrograph from a typical colony is presented in Fig. 8.
A possible clue to the nature of the trauma suffered by cells on repeated washing in saline which increases their dependence on a "feeder" cell system has been obtained in washing experiments carried out on a variety of animal cells grown in P~-labelled medium.These experiments which are still progressing, show that a large fraction of the cellular p3s including both large and small molecular constituents, is liberated from animal cells under these conditions.Such losses doubtless impair the cell's ability to initiate its reproductive cycle, even though no morphological damage is evident on microscopic examination.It is of interest that the amount of cellular P~ leaking out into the medium is much less when comp!ete growth medium rather than Hanks's solution is used for washing.
The methods described in this and the preceding section have been successfully applied to clonal growth of several normal animal cells which have been found to give high plating efficiencies.The cell strains employed were isolated from normal human foreskin, conjunctiva, kidney, appendix, and liver, and from chick embryonic tissue.The details of growth and colonial development of such cells will be described in a subsequent paper, but it is worthy of notice here that of this group, the chick fibroblast alone has so far resisted cultivation as a clone except in the presence of a "feeder" system.

Colony Isolation and the Properties of Mutant Clonal Stocks.-

Colonies formed by single HeLa cells grown by either of the methods described have been isolated, picked, subcultured, and developed into standard clonal populations.The procedure is as follows: All but 0.5 cc. of the medium is removed and a sterile, stainless steel cylinder (6 ram. in diameter, 12 ram.high with 1 ram.wall) whose bottom edge has been coated with silicone stopcock grease (Dow Coming) is placed over the colony to be isolated.The silicone forms a water-tight seal between the glass and metal.A few drops of trypsin solution are delivered into the open top of the cylinder and the plate incubated at 37°C. for 5 minutes.The supernatant liquid is sucked off slowly and nutrient medium replaced in the cylinder.Mild agitation then causes detachment of the cells from the glass, and the resulting suspension of clonal cells can be drawn off into a sterile syringe and transferred to a new vessel.As an alternative procedure, the single cells may originally be plated on a Petri dish, the bottom of which has first been coated with 1 cc. of 1 per cent agar made up in normal saline.After the agar solidifies, the cells are added in 4.0 cc. of growth medium plus 0.20 per cent agar.Under these conditions the cells grow into spherical colonies rather than two-dimensional monolayers.After 10 to 14 days of growth, these spheres can be isolated by means of a pipette and deposited in a new container.The clonal stocks are readily built up to populations of l0 T in a single bottle and can be maintained indefinitely with unimpaired vigor through scores of passages.To insure genetic purity, each of our clonal stocks is passed through at least 2 single cell isolation procedures.We have designated the clonal strains of the Iiela cell isolated here as S1, $2, $3, etc., (S for Dr. Florence Sabin).
Clonal stocks may be stored for periods of 1 month or more in stoppered tubes containing complete growth medium plus 0.2 per cent agar.These are inoculated with 200 to 500 cells, incubated for about 8 days at 37°C., and then transferred to room temperature (22°C.)for storage.The cells grow slowly under these conditions, developing into characteristic spherical clusters of about 1 ram. in diameter after 30 days.
Practically all the work in this laboratory is now carried on with pure clonal strains of HeLa cells.These stocks exhibit much greater uniformity of behavior than do those of the parental strain.Fig. 4 illustrates the colonial development in the absence of a "feeder" layer obtained from single cells of our $3 stock.The great uniformity of the resulting colonies stands in contrast to that obtained with the parental type grown under identical conditions* (of.Fig. 3).
Different clonal strains of the HeLa tumor exhibit differences in characteristics like plating efficiency in media of certain compositions.These differences have persisted throughout more than 20 generations of growth and hence appear to be genuine mutational characters.Details of work with genetic markers will be presented in a further paper.

Growth Curves of a Clonal Population.-

The techniques here described make possible simple and accurate determination of the growth curve and division time of HeLa cells.Single cells are deposited in Petri dishes in nutrient medium and incubated in the standard fashion.At various time intervals microscopic count is made of the cell number in one or a few specific clones, or in an average of ten or twenty clones chosen
J uJ at random on the plate.*The growth curves obtained are highly reproducible and exhibit an initial lag period of approximatdy 20 hours, followed by linearly logarithmic reproduction, as shown in Text-fig.1.When the cell number exceeds 3,000, the slope may begin to flatten, doubtless because the two-dimensional character of the growth eventually results in crowding of the innermost cells.The curves obtained closely resemble those obtained for bacterial growth.In complete growth medium, our most active mutant strains exhibit a division TExT-FIG.1.Typical growth curve of $3 strain of HeLa cells.The hollow and solid circles, respectively, represent two different experiments separated by an interval of 3 weeks.The extrapolated lag period is 18 hours and the generation time (time taken for the population to double) is 20 hours.As an index of the precision of the individual figures: Each point in the experiment represented by hollow circles is the mean of at least 6 and at most 43 colonies.The standard deviations of the cell counts averaged 22 per cent, and never exceeded 33 per cent.time of 20 + 2 hours, which is the maximal growth rate achieved by these cells under any conditions in our experience.Since the total lag period represents only one division time, and since 4 to 5 hours of the lag are required for the process of cell attachment to glass, the conditions of clonal growth in these plates appear to approach the optimum.

Cell and Colonial Morphology: Influence of Serum Factors on HeLa Cell Cohesiveness.--

It was noted that HeLa cells multiplying in the standard nutrient medium tend more often to form closely packed colonies in the presence of a "feeder" 4 Plastic Petri dish covers with optically plane surfaces are particularly convenient, and are furnished by Plasticrafts, Inc., Denver.system than in its absence.Similarly, the cells in a large colony are usually much more closely packed than in a small one.This aspect of colonial morphology is of considerable interest because of its possible relationship to factors which control the invasiveness of cancer cells (8).The availability of pure clonal stocks with their great morphologic uniformity is of particular convenience in the study of such a problem.
Experiments were performed with cells of the $3 clone.No "feeder" system was employed.Under these conditions it was found that the degree of cellular cohesiveness can be completely controlled by adjustment of the amount of human serum in the growth medium.The presence of pooled human serum to the extent of 10 per cent or more causes the cells to grow in a loose, highly extended meshwork.If human serum is omitted from the medium and replaced by bovine, porcine, or even a mixture of equine and bovine sera, the cells grow in an exceedingly dense, compact colony with polygonal array of cells, epithelial-like in appearance.These striking differences, evidence of wide phenotypic variation in a constant genotype, are portrayed macroscopically in Figs. 5 and 6, and microscopically in Figs. 9 and 10.The differences between the two types are evident throughout the entire colony in small colonies, and in large colonies are maximal for the cells at the edges because of the tendency previously noted for cells at the center of large colonies to assume a close packed form, even in human serum.It is of particular significance that, both in the presence or absence of human serum, the plating efficiency is 100 per cent and the growth rates are the same and maximal; i.e., the generation time is 20 to 21 hours.
We conclude, then, that pooled human serum contains a factor which has no effect on the ability of the HeLa cell to reproduce, but markedly alters its cellular state from a highly compact to a loose, migratory structure.
Cells grown in the presence of 10 per cent or more of pooled human serum not only possess a distinct migratory property as shown by a comparison of the two different cell types of Figs. 9 and 10, but also expose much greater surface area.This was demonstrated by measurement of various cellular dimensions in an attempt to secure further information about the morphological differences produced by the two kinds of media.The cross-sectional area of each cell type was determined by microprojection on cross-sectional paper and planimetry of the area bounded by individual cells.Cross-sectional areas of the cell nuclei were also measured.Cell volumes were determined by microscopic measurement of the diameters of the spherical cells resulting from mild trypsinization.Living cells were employed in all these determinations, and measurements were repeated on at least 20 different cells of each type.The mean and standard deviation of each type of measurement is presented in Table I.They reveal clearly that individual cells grown in pooled human serum present four times as much surface area to the bathing medium as those grown in porcine or bovine serum.The surprising fact shown by the table is that, despite this tremendous difference in cross-sectional area, both cell types have volumes which are identical within the limits of accuracy of the measurements.This constancy of volume, as well as the identity in the 2 ceil types of other parameters, like nuclear cross-section, growth rate, and plating efficiency, suggests strongly that the basic cell change produced by the factor in human serum, has taken place in the surface membrane.In the presence of pooled human serum the cell wall appears to have a high affinity for glass and relatively little for neighboring cells, so that the structure is flattened and stretched, and tends to migrate away from its neighbors.In the absence of human serum, adjacent cell walls attract each other strongly, resulting in a compact structure of columnar cells with smaller cross-sectional area, but greater height)

Measurement of Cell and Nuclear Cross-Sections, and Cell Volumes of Lidng Ceils Grown (.4) in the Presence of Pooled Human Serum and (B) in


Non-Human Serum (Specifically Porcine)

The mean and standard deviation of each set of measurements (which included at least 20 and, in some cases, more than 200 cells) is given.Growth outside the body of single animal cells into colonies has been described previously, as in the experiments of Moen with guinea pig fibroblasts (9) and Earle and his coworkers who sealed single mouse fibroblasts into capillaries (10).With both of these techniques only a small per cent of the cell inoculum yielded colonies, and it is impossible to determine whether this low yield is due to trauma suffered by the majority of the cells, or whether it expresses an intrinsic low multiplication potential of the cells from the particular tissues studied.The plating procedure described in this and a previous paper of this series makes possible simple and rapid titration of the number of multiplying ceils in a population, and has demonstrated that for HeLa cells this figure is practically 100 per cent, and remains at this value throughout repeated subcultures.It becomes essential to determine how many different kinds of cells can be titrated by this technique, and what their plating efliciencies will be under different metabolic conditions.6

Growth in pooIAd human

The plating procedure here described affords a simple and quantitative means of study of the action of agents which destroy cellular reproductive capacity.For example, the mean lethal dose of ionizing radiation for the reproductive function of a somatic mammalian cell has now been determined for the first time (6).In addition to measurement of absolute losses of growth function, it becomes possible to examine the effects of agents which change the generation time or the lag period with an accuracy and simplicity completely comparable to that available with a microorganism like Escherichia coli.
These methods also enlarge the scope of genetic investigations on mammalian somatic cells.The ability to establish clonal lines of mammalian cells rapidly is, of itself, only a small improvement on Earle's capillary technique (10).The real genetic contribution of the plating procedures here described is that it permits screening of huge populations so that the rare mutants can be isolated and developed into new strains.For example, if it were desired to isolate a mutant which occurs only once in a population of 107 individuals, it becomes necessary only to plate this number of cells in a medium which will support the growth of such a mutant but not of the wild type.No manipulation of the individual cells of the population is required.In this way, it becomes possible systematically to search for desired mutant characters, and to study quantitatively natural and artificially produced mutation rates, for stable genetic characters which are not susceptible to study by methods requiring special handling of each cell.Thus, the procedures developed in microbiological systems for study of gene biochemistry and neo=classical genetic processes (e.g., transduction, transformation, conversion, cytoplasmic inheritance) would appear now to be capable of application to animal somatic cells.
These plating procedures also permit new studies of the action of animal viruses on their host cells.It now becomes possible to determine the effect of viruses on the reproductive capacity of an individual cell; to measure accurately how many virus particles are required to block this ability, reversibly or irreversibly; to investigate what changes of the virus particle are needed to prevent its exercising this action; and to test with confidence for the existence in animal cells of virus mechanisms similar to that of lysogenesis in bacteria.
The dynamics of the "feeder" system are of special interest.As Earle has pointed out, any necessity to "condition" a medium reflects only its lack of nutritional adequacy.In every case, therefore, once a cell strain can be induced to grow when nourished by a "feeder" layer, the next step in the process should s Growth of single, ascites tumor cells inoculated inside the living animal has been accomplished (11), a situation quite different from in t, ilro cell growth.
be to investigate what change in conditions will permit single cells to multiply in the absence of "feeders."However, the feeder principle is a powerful adjunct because it may permit the initial clonal cultivation of cells, after which it may be much easier to isolate clonal stocks and discover means for their adaptation to growth without "feeders."In principle, the feeder technique would appear to permit donal cultivation of any cell for which large inocula can be made to multiply by standard tissue culture procedures,
The high metabolic activity of the "feeder" cells which enables them to condition the medium effectively despite their total loss of reproductive ability is understandable in view of the nature of the x-ray inactivating process.The ability of the cell to reproduce encompasses the duplication of the complete cell machinery, and hence is more vulnerable to damage by discrete, random, energetic events than is any of the more restricted cell functions.The total amount of energy absorbed by a cell irradiated with 4,000 r is 4,000 X 2.03 X 10 -6 calories/ gin., an amount of energy equivalent to a temperature rise of only 0.008°C.Hence the effect of the irradiation in multiplication must be confined to the production of a block in one or a very few of the metabolic chains necessary for growth.
It is particularly noteworthy that a factor exists in pooled human serum which can produce extraordinary effects on ceU and colonial morphology, without appreciable change in the plating efficiency, growth rate, or cell volume, suggesting that the site of this action is localized in the cell wall.Coman and his coworkers (8) have demonstrated that cancerous epithelial ceils differ from their normal counterparts in being deficient in the ability to bind Ca ++.This property prevents the invasive cells from adhering together, so that their natural ameboid motion results in extensive migration.Thus, the conditions provided by the presence of the responsible factors in human serum may, by alteration of the cdl wall, play an important part in causing a localized tumor to become invasive.The nature of factors which can produce such a marked phenotypic change in mammalian cells of a constant genotype is of great interest.
Studies along the various lines which have been described are continuing.

SUM~KARY

Two methods for simple and rapid plating of single HeLa cells, human, carcinomatous cells, are described.These result in growth and formation of colonies from each single cell.One of these procedures uses irradiated, non-multiplying "feeder" cells to condition the medium.The second requires more gentle handling of the cells, but otherwise is virtually the same as that used in plating bacteria on semisolid, nutrient media.
By extension of these methods, it is possible to isolate single mutant colonies and grow pure clonal stocks of animal cells.These genetically uniform strains are much more homogeneous in their behavior than the parental HeLa cell population.
Growth curves obtained from developing colonies are highly reproducible:
The most active mutant stocks so far isolated display a generation time of 18 to 20 hours.In pooled human serum HeLa cells assume a highly stretched, ameboid form, with marked motility; whereas growth of the same cells in a variety of nonhuman sera results in tightly packed, columnar, epithelial-like morphology.The two cell types possess volumes, nuclear cross-sections, plating efficiencies, and generation times which are identical within experimental error, but display widely different cross-sectional areas, suggesting that the basic change occurs in the cell sudace.It is conceivable that this change may be related to that which enables the cells of a compact tumor to become invasivc.
Animal cells subjccted to the standard trypsinization procedures which involve mechanical trauma and repeated washings in incomplete media leak large amounts of P and suffer impaired ability to reproduce as isolated cells.
Application of the methods described in this paper as a tool for quantitative study of normal mammalian cell growth, physiology, genetics, and biochemistry, and the response of cells to drugs, viruses, high energy radiation, and other agents have been indicated.
Grateful appreciation is expressed to the Colorado Serum Company, Denver, for unstinting aid in obtaining the various animal sers which were used in these studies.

EXPLANATION OF PLATF.~S PLATE 10

FIGS. 1 and 2. Demonstration of operation of "feeder" cell system in growing colonies from single HeLa cells.Plates were incubated for 8 days, fixed with Bouin's solution, and stained with hematoxylin eosin.
FIG. 1. Plate with x-irradiated "feeder" cells alone.The granular background is due to the irradiated cells.Actual size.
FIG. 2. Identical plate as in Fig. 1, but which received in addition an aliquot of 100 normal cells.The colony count obtained is 97.Actual size.
FIG. 3. Plate to which 100 gently trypsinized HeLa cells were added in an identical manner with that of Fig. 2, except that no "feeder" layer was employecl.Actual size.These colonies generally show greater variation in density than do those grown over feeders (Figs. 1 and 2), tending to be somewhat more loosely packed.
FIG. 4. Colonies developed from single cells of a pure genetic strain ($3) of HeLa cells, under conditions identical with those used in the experiment shown in Fig. 3 (i.e., no feeder system).The greater uniformity of the $3 cells as compared with the original HeLa population is obvious.The observed plating efficiency was 93 per cent.Actual size.
serum Cellular cross-sectional area ........ 1600 + 500 ~2 • 200 + 45/~s Nudear cross-sectional area ....... '1 (3.7 + 1.5) X 10 s/~s Cell volume .....................

FIGS. 5 and 6 . 10 ( 11 FIG. 7 .

FIGS. 1 and 2. Demonstration of operation of "feeder" cell system in growing colonies from single HeLa cells.Plates were incubated for 8 days, fixed with Bouin's solution, and stained with hematoxylin eosin.FIG.1.Plate with x-irradiated "feeder" cells alone.The granular background is due to the irradiated cells.Actual size.FIG.2.Identical plate as in Fig.1, but which received in addition an aliquot of 100 normal cells.The colony count obtained is 97.Actual size.FIG.3.Plate to which 100 gently trypsinized HeLa cells were added in an identical manner with that of Fig.2, except that no "feeder" layer was employecl.Actual size.These colonies generally show greater variation in density than do those grown over feeders (Figs.1 and 2), tending to be somewhat more loosely packed.FIG.4.Colonies developed from single cells of a pure genetic strain ($3) of HeLa cells, under conditions identical with those used in the experiment shown in Fig.3(i.e., no feeder system).The greater uniformity of the $3 cells as compared with the original HeLa population is obvious.The observed plating efficiency was 93 per cent.Actual size.FIGS.5 and 6.Effect of pooled human serum on the colonial morphology of $3 HeLa cells.Actual size.FIG. 5. Complete growth medium, with human serum.FIG. 6. Same, except that human serum was replaced by calf serum.

TABLE I

I
* The George Washington Carver Foundation, Tuskegee Institute has undertaken to distribute this clonal stock to interested laboratories.
The greater height of the cells grown in non-human serum was confirmed by phase microscopic examination of the colonies in situ. With each type of preparation, the microscope objective was first focused on the glass surface, then raised until the top of the living cell layer was in focus. The number of divisions on the calibrated fine adjustment screw was noted in each case. The cells grown in the absence of human serum were found to be approximately 4 times higher than the stretched variety, a value which is an excellent confirmation of the relationships shown in TableI.
PLATE 11 (Puck et al.: Clonal growth of mammalian cells in vitro) PLATE 12FIGS. 9 and 10.Photomicrographs of typical colonies growing in the presence .andabsence of human serum.In the presence of the human serum, the cells are long and stretched, and very diffusely spread (Fig.9), while in its absence, they are ,cuboidal and extremely closely packed (Fig.10).All conditions were identical in the two platings.The black line represents a distance of 100 ~. (Phase contrast.)
The Cultivation of Animal and Plant Cells. I White, P R , Biology of Tissue Cells. 171954. 1945Cambridge University Press
T T Puck, P I Marcus, Proc. N~. Acad. So. N~. Acad. So1955432
. W F Scherer, J T Syverton, G 0 Gey, ' Exp, M~, 1953695
. C Waymouth, Texo~ Reports Biol. and Med. 5221955
. R Dulbecco, M Vogt,
. Exp. Med. 1671954
. T T Puck, P I Marcus, data to be published
. J S Youngner, Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. and Med. 2021954
. D R Coman, T F Anderson, H T Enterline, D R Coman, Cancer Research. 151955. 1950, 3, 1033Cancer
. J K Moen, J. Exp. Med. 2471935
. W R Earle, J C Bryant, E L Schilling, Ann, 19541000
. T Yoshida, Nat. Cancer Inst. 9471952
. R S Chang, Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. and Med. 4401954
