
Introduction

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are poised to play a central role in the orderly transition of the eukaryotic cells through different stages of the mitotic cell division cycle {{26914759}}. The activities of the CDKs are controlled by a tight network of regulatory mechanisms, which comprise activatory/inhibitory phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events {{42478473}}, controlled degradation of the cyclin partner and association with effectors (CDK inhibitors or CDKIs) {{26914759}}{{not_in_s2orc}}. Several CDKIs (such as p21, p57, p27 etc.) function as tumour supressors {{18930442}}{{not_in_s2orc}}{{29954395}}{{11494280}} and loss/subversion of its activities (by mutations, elevated or decreased levels of expression etc.) results in the development of tumours, cancers and neoplasms {{207078287}}{{14499789}}. The importance of CDKIs in benign and malignant leukaemias, urological and other diseases (e.g. p57 in Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome) {{37912884}} is a subject of intense ongoing investigation. Though initially considered as tumour suppressors based on their ability to block cell proliferation, CDKIs play pertinent roles in the regulation of a myriad of cellular processes including transcription, apoptosis, cell migration and cytoskeletal dynamics, which may be oncogenic under certain circumstances {{not_in_s2orc}}{{28194740}}. Due to the involvement of CDKs in critical cellular roles, inhibition of CDKs harbors immense relevance for anticancer therapy {{28194740}}. Inhibition of CDKs could be accomplished both by over expression of cellular CDKIs {{85370312}} as well as pharmacological inhibitors. Cellular CDKIs e.g. the tumour suppressor gene products p16 INK4 , p21 WAF1 , and p27 KIP1 , form the starting point for the design of mechanism-based CDK inhibitors {{21724702}}. Analysis of the structural aspects of cellular CDKIs leads to the identification of inhibitory lead peptides amenable to peptidomimetic development. Conversion of these peptides into pharmaceutically useful molecules provides a wealth of potential drug candidates capable of inhibiting CDKs, blocking cell-cycle progression, modulating transcription and inducing apoptosis selectively in cancer cells. Some of these, such as flavopiridol (L868275, HMR1275; Aventis), 7-hydroxystaurosporine (UCN-01, KW-2401; Kyowa Hakko Kogyo) and roscovitine (Rroscovitine, CYC202; Cyclacel), have already reached the stage of clinical evaluation {{10078510}}{{30286388}}. These pharmacological CDKIs herald the opening of new avenues of clinical therapies against such intractable pathogens like human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) {{17913053}} and several protozoan parasites like Plasmodium, Trypanosoma and Leishmania {{45043549}}{{15514356}}{{25895514}}. CDKIs also constitute potential targets for therapeutic stem cell manipulations {{837661}}.
In the light of well established significance of CDKI proteins within the cell and in the development of pharmacological CDK inhibitors, it becomes essential to have facile methods of identifying these proteins. However, these exhibit a lot of diversity in their amino acid sequences. These are represented by INK4 {{9339088}} and Cip/Kip {{12953015}} families in mammals, Sic1 protein {{39993743}} in fungi and SIAMESE (SIM) {{2568099}} family and ICK/KRP (Inhibitor of CDK/Kip-Related Protein) {{83622607}} family in plants. Owing to this enormous diversity, its identification is precluded by simple similarity-based approaches. As an alternative to similarity based methods, we applied two machine learning techniques, namely, Support Vector Machines (SVM) and Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) to address this problem. We used compositional features including amino acid composition (AAC), Split Amino Acid Composition (SAAC), Di-peptide Composition (DPC) and gapped dipeptide composition (2-gram), as well as evolutionary information from the Position-Specific Scoring Matrix (PSSM) profiles obtained from Position-Specific Iterative-Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (PSI-BLAST) for training the classifiers.
Given the immense biomedical merit and therapeutic potential of CDKIs, we anticipate that this would be a useful tool for the research community.

Results

Performance of alignment-based techniques

The positive training set was checked for the presence of Pfam {{1246355}} domains. The Pfam database contains three CDKI-related profiles (CDI (PF02234), CDKN3 (PF05706) and P19Arf_N (PF07392)). It was found that only 40 out of 56 CDKI sequences showed the presence of any one of these three Pfam signatures at an E-value threshold of 1.0. Moreover, the high diversity in the sequences of CDKIs would preclude the detection of the true positives also with similarity-based searches. This was evident from our assessment of PSI-BLAST on the positive dataset in a manner similar to Leave-one-out cross-validation (LOO CV).
Three iterations of PSI-BLAST were carried out at an E-value threshold of 0.001. Each sequence was used as the query sequence once while the rest were used as the reference database and this was looped over each sequence. It was found that 10 sequences did not find any significant hit, bringing forth that general methods of similarity-based searches do not provide a reliable solution to the identification of CDKIs and a method specific to these proteins should be developed. Therefore, we set forth to explore machinelearning based methods based on various protein features for the prediction of CDKI proteins.
Performance of alignment-free methods -SVM and ANN SVM. Several SVM models were generated by varying the parameters C and c during LOO CV, however only the best ones (as described in Methods) were selected and are depicted in Table 1. The performance measures were checked at different thresholds of SVM scores ranging from 21.0 to 1.0 and the threshold where the model yielded the best ones was used for further predictions by the model. The PSSM based model showed the best accuracy (90.44%), followed by AAC (89.88%), DPC (86.23%), SAAC (83.42%) and 2-gram composition (79.77%). The other measures (sensitivity, specificity, Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC), Positive predictive value (PPV) etc.) also followed the same order. Thus PSSM model emerged as the best one amongst the SVM classifiers. Moreover, the performance of the PSSM model was an improvement over the normal PSI-BLAST search (as described in the previous section), since here the sensitivity was 49/56 (87.50%) unlike PSI-BLAST (where it was 46/56, i.e. 82.14%). PSSM-based SVM classifiers are have been employed for a plethora of classification problems in biology and are well known for their remarkable performance for extremely diverse proteins like lipocalins {{12061066}}, nucleic acid binding proteins {{6575175}}, etc. Apart from capturing residue composition, the PSSM profiles encapsulate useful information about conservation of residues at crucial positions within the protein sequence, because in evolution the amino acid residues with similar physico-chemical properties tend to be highly conserved due to selective pressure.
Neural networks. Different ANNs were generated for the different types of features, while optimizing the learning parameters including activation function, number of hidden neurons, learning rate etc. The approach was to keep the number of hidden neurons and the number of training cycles as low as possible while simultaneously achieving good accuracies in cross-validation. Each of the neural networks had a multilayer feed forward topology. The vanilla backpropagation {{not_in_s2orc}} algorithm was used to minimize the differences between the computed output and the target value. Random weights were used for initializing the net. The best ones for each feature are described below and tabulated in Table 2.
AAC based ANN. This consisted of a fully-connected network, with 20 nodes in the input layer, 12 in the hidden layer and 1 in the output layer. The linear activation function was used for the input layer while the logistic function was used for the hidden and the output layer. The training was carried out for 5000 cycles and learning terminated when SSE was minimum. This yielded an accuracy of 85.11%, but sensitivity was lower (67.85%) than specificity (88.33%).
SAAC based ANN. This consisted of a fully-connected network, with 60 nodes in the input layer, 8 in the hidden layer and 1 in the output layer. In this case too the linear activation was used for the input layer with the logistic function for the other two layers. The training was carried out for 1000 cycles and learning terminated when SSE was minimum. This had an accuracy of 85.11%, but sensitivity (64.28%) was even lower than the AACbased ANN, while specificity was a little higher than the latter (89%).
DPC based ANN. This consisted of a fully-connected network, with 400 nodes in the input layer, 2 in the hidden layer and 1 in the output layer. Here, the logistic function was used as activation function for each of the three layers. The training was carried out for 2000 cycles and learning terminated when SSE was minimum. This had an accuracy of 90.44%, and appreciably higher sensitivity (82.14%) than other ANNs with a high specificity of 92%.
2-gram based ANN. This consisted of a fully-connected network, with 400 nodes in the input layer, 2 in the hidden layer and 1 in the output layer. The logistic function was used as activation function for all the three layers and the training was carried out for 1000 cycles. This ANN had a higher sensitivity (69.64%) than AAC-and SAAC-based ANNs but could not provide any improvement over the DPC-based ANN. The overall accuracy was 86.51% and specificity was 89.66%. PSSM-based ANN. This consisted of a fully-connected network, with 400 nodes in the input layer, 10 in the hidden layer and 1 in the output layer. The logistic activation was used for input and output layers while linear activation function was employed for hidden layer. The training was carried out for 6500 cycles and terminated at minimal SSE. This ANN had overall accuracy of 87.92% and specificity of 91.66% with low sensitivity of 67.85% and could not provide any significant improvement over other ANNs.
Though the overall accuracy was good enough with all the ANNs, it had a higher contribution from the negative set rather than the positive set, so the DPC-based ANN emerged as the most efficient classifier which had good sensitivity as well as specificity.
Performance on benchmark datasets

We tested the performance of the best classifiers only on the benchmark datasets (i.e. Datasets S3 and S4). Table 3 depicts the sensitivity, specificity and PPV of these classifiers on these two datasets. Herein, we observed better prediction efficiency for the DPC-based SVM model over the AAC-based SVM model, unlike that in cross-validation. It is plausible that some over-fitting of data could have occurred in cross-validation with AAC. The DPCbased ANN also performed almost at par with the SVM models. As expected, the PSSM-based SVM model yielded the best performance amongst all the tested classifiers on all the test sets.
Based on the performance in LOO CV and on benchmark datasets, the PSSM-based SVM model was selected as the best model. Its performance was further tested on randomly picked up phosphatases and kinases (Datasets S5 and S6). A number of phosphatases and kinases bind to CDKs as do the CDKIs. Moreover a CDK inhibitor i.e. Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 3 (CDKN3) or Kinase-associated phosphatase (KAP), is a dualspecificity phosphatase which contains the HCXX-XXGR motif characteristic of protein tyrosine phosphatases {{1844732}}. This protein binds to CDK2 and dephosphorylates Thr160 when the associated cyclin subunit is degraded or dissociates, thereby rendering CDK2 inactive {{14062129}}{{44864956}}. Hence phosphatases and kinases are potent candidates for false positive predictions.
Amongst the 65 kinases, two were wrongly predicted as CDKIs while amongst the 65 phosphatases, four were wrongly predicted as CDKIs by the PSSM-based SVM model. Thus the false positive prediction rate of the model is low enough to justify its utility for practical applications.
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) plot

ROC curves show the trade-off between true positive rate (sensitivity) and false positive rate (1-specificity) over their entire range of possible values. It is considered as the most robust approach for classifier evaluation {{10006606}}. The Area Under Curve (AUC) is used as a reliable index of classifier performance. This validates the threshold-independent performance of the classifiers. We plotted the ROC curve for the best classifier, PSSM-based SVM model (Figure 1). The curve had an AUC of 0.933 which further reinforced the discriminative efficiency of the model.
Web implementation

The Web server was developed using Apache (version 2.0). Server side scripting was done in PHP (version 5.0). The prediction algorithm presented in this study is implemented as a freely accessible web server at http://bioinfo.icgeb.res.in/cdkipred ( Figure 2). The program predicts CDKI sequences using the SVM model based on PSSM profile. The input sequences are provided in the FASTA format. The program allows the users to perform prediction at thresholds ranging from 21.0 to 1.0 for SVM score. The program output returns the sequence ID, the SVM score and the decision of the classifier regarding the sequence based on the threshold chosen.

Methods

Generation of datasets for SVM and ANN training

Two sets containing CDKI and non-CDKI sequences were compiled from different databases-including Genbank, SwissProt and RefSeq. The positive set was prepared through keyword search using keywords like 'CDK inhibitor' while the negative set was assembled by randomly picking the non-CDKIs. Both the sets were manually inspected to prevent the mislabeling of the data. The redundancy in both the sets was removed at a similarity threshold of 40% using the CD-HIT program {{206340350}}. This yielded a positive set of 56 well-annotated and mostly experimentally verified CDKIs (Dataset S1) and a negative set of 300 non-CDKIs (Dataset S2).
Benchmark dataset for testing

In order to gauge the utility of our best SVM models and ANNs for unseen sequences, we tested their performance on independent datasets not used in training or testing cycles. While one test dataset consisted of 48 CDKIs (Dataset S3), the other had 308 non-CDKIs (Dataset S4). Moreover, we prepared two datasets for testing the performance of the best model in the study. These consisted of randomly picked up sequences of 65 phosphatases (Dataset S5) and 65 kinases (Dataset S6) from SwissProt.
Training features used as input for SVMs and NNs

Different compositional features, i.e. AAC, SAAC, DPC and 2gram composition were extracted from the positive and negative dataset sequences. Evolutionary information in the form of PSSM profiles for both the sets was also used to train SVM models and ANNs.
AAC is the fraction of each of the 20 amino acids present in a protein sequence. This generates an input vector of 20 dimensions. For calculating SAAC, the protein was split into three parts of equal length and the fraction of each amino acid calculated separately for the three. This generates an input vector of 60 dimensions. DPC is the fraction of a dipeptide divided by the total number of possible dipeptides in the given protein sequence. This yields a training vector of 400 dimensions. 2-gram composition is the fraction of dipeptides composed by two amino acids with one separating residue in between. This yields a training vector of 400 dimensions. The PSSM was obtained by performing PSI-BLAST against SwissProt database (release 57.13) at the E-value threshold of 0.001 with three iterations. The matrix contains 206N elements, N being the length of the query sequence, and each element represents the frequency of a particular residue substitution at a specific position in the alignment. To generate input vectors of fixed length for SVM training, the PSSM matrix was normalized between 0 and 1 using the following logistic function:
Where x is the raw value in PSSM profile and g(x) is the normalized value of x. Following this, the normalized matrix is organized into a composition matrix of fixed length pattern of 400 (20620, for each amino acid, there are 20 substitution scores from normalized matrix).
SVMs and SVM light

SVM is a supervised machine learning method extensively used in classification and regression problems based on Structural Risk Minimization (SRM) principle from statistical learning theory {{not_in_s2orc}}. SVM is used in conjunction with kernel functions which implicitly map input data to a higher dimensional non-linear feature space. SVM builds a model (classifier) by constructing an optimal hyperplane that divides the positively and negatively labeled samples with the maximum margin of separation. To construct an optimal hyperplane, SVMs employ an iterative training algorithm, which is used to minimize an error function. Hyperplanes are searched in the space of possible inputs; subsequently these hyperplanes are used to separate positive and negative patterns. The selected data points supporting the hyperplane are called support vectors.
We implemented SVM using the software SVM light written and distributed by Joachims {{61116019}}. This package enables users to select from a choice of inbuilt kernel functions and to define a number of parameters for each kernel function. For a given kernel function, a large number of models (classifiers) can be built by varying the input values for its parameters and evaluated. We used Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel to train and test our training datasets. The values of c and regularization parameter C were optimized on the training datasets by cross-validation. The approach was aimed at choosing the parameters so as to maximize accuracy along with nearly equal sensitivity and specificity, wherever possible.
ANN and SNNS

The Artificial Neural Network (ANN) consists of nodes or neurons that receive signals through interconnecting arcs {{not_in_s2orc}}. Signals are passed between neurons (organized in input, hidden and output layers) through connection links which carry an associated weight. Each neuron applies a non-linear transformation called an activation function to its net input to determine it output signal.
We used the freely available package Stuttgart Neural Network Simulator (http://www.ra.cs.uni-tuebingen.de/SNNS/), SNNS version 4.2 to implement ANN. One advantage that this package offers is that it allows the incorporation of the trained networks in ANSI C functions for use in stand-alone code. The feed-forward back propagation type of neural networks was trained on different protein features. The number of hidden nodes and other learning parameters were optimized for each network. The output unit consisted of target value 1 or 0, referring to positives and negatives respectively. The Sum of Squared Error function (SSE) on training was monitored after every training cycle. The final number of cycles was determined where the SSE was the least. The value of the learning rate was set to 0.1.
Leave-One-Out Cross -Validation (LOO CV)

This is considered as the most objective and rigorous mode of evaluation wherein one dataset sequence is kept for testing, while the rest are used to train the model/NN. This is repeated till each sequence becomes the testing data exactly once. This is a stringent case of n-fold cross-validation where n equals the total number of sequences. The various performance measures (explained below) are taken for n folds and then averaged to get overall assessment of the classifier.
Classifier performance metrics

To evaluate the accuracy of SVM classifiers and ANNs developed in cross-validation cycles; we used four measures. Sensitivity is defined as the percentage of CDKI protein sequences that are correctly predicted as CDKIs. Specificity is the percentage of non-CDKI protein sequences that are correctly predicted as non-CDKIs. Accuracy is the percentage of correct predictions out of total number of predictions. Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) is a measure of both sensitivity and specificity, MCC = 0 indicates completely random prediction, while MCC = 1 indicates perfect prediction. Positive predictive value (PPV) is the likelihood that a sequence reported by the classifier as CDKI is really CDKI.
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) plot

Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS v16.0) for Windows was used to obtain the ROC plot {{2027090}} for the best classifier obtained in the study.

Supporting Information

Dataset S1 Set of 56 annotated and mostly experimentally verified CDKIs. Author Contributions




CITED_PAPERS:


1246355:The Pfam protein families database


INTRODUCTION

Pfam is a comprehensive database of conserved protein families. This collection of nearly 12 000 families is used extensively throughout the biological sciences, by experimental biologists researching specific proteins, computational biologists who need to organise sequences, and evolutionary biologists considering the origin and evolution of proteins. Pfam is also widely used in the structural biology community for identifying interesting new targets for structure determination.
From its inception 12 years ago, Pfam has been designed to scale with the growth in the number of new protein sequences deposited. Scalability is achieved by having a set of seed alignments, with each alignment containing a representative set of sequences that are relatively stable between releases of the database. The seed alignments are used to build profile hidden Markov models (HMMs) that can be used to search any sequence database for homologues in a sensitive and accurate fashion. Those homologues that score above the curated inclusion thresholds are aligned against the profile to make a full alignment.
Our goal is to make Pfam a comprehensive and accurate classification of all known protein sequences. The 11 912 curated families are known as Pfam-A and are found in approximately three quarters of known proteins. In order to increase our coverage further, we augment the Pfam-A family collection with a set of automatically generated families called Pfam-B. Pfam-B is derived from the ADDA domain collection (1), which is described later.
Ten years ago, a family with more than 1000 sequences was considered to be large. Today, a growing number of families contain over 100 000 sequences. Depositions from large-scale metagenomic and other sequencing projects mean that we can expect the number of known sequences to grow into the billions, from the millions that we currently have. In order to deal with this explosion in the number of known sequences, we have made fundamental changes to the Pfam infrastructure. The most important of these has been the move to a new version of the profile HMM software, HMMER (http://hmmer .janelia.org/), which we use to build and search our models. Since 1998, Pfam (version 3.0 onwards) has utilised the HMMER2 package for building profile HMMs and searching them against sequences in the underlying sequence database. The new version of HMMER (version 3) is $100 times faster than the previous version and shows increased sensitivity.
In this article, we will describe the major changes that underlie the new version of Pfam (release 24.0) along with the major updates we have made to the families within the collection. We also describe changes made to both the database and to the web site and its associated services.

HMMER3

An alpha version of HMMER3 was released in early 2009. The HMMER3 project has four main aims: (i) to adopt log-odds likelihood scores summed over alignment uncertainty (Forward scores) in place of optimal alignment (Viterbi) scores; (ii) to report posterior probabilities of alignment confidence; (iii) to be able to accurately and quickly calculate expectation values (E-values) for Forward scores (a previously unsolved problem); and (iv) to accelerate previous profile HMM performance by two orders of magnitude and achieve an overall speed competitive with BLAST (2). These goals have been met and the software package is now undergoing testing pending a stable 3.0 release. The outcome of aims (i) and (iii) make HMMER3 more sensitive. The increase in speed arises from a combination of approaches, including the use of vector-parallel SIMD (single instruction multiple data) instructions (SSE2 on Intel-compatible platforms; Altivec/VMX on PowerPC platforms); a new acceleration heuristic; and a 'sparse rescaling' method enabling the Forward and Backward HMM algorithms to be implemented in much faster calculations based on scaled probabilities rather than standard implementation in log probabilities (all to be described more fully in a future paper). The Cambridge Pfam team (especially RDF) has worked closely with the Janelia Farm HMMER team (especially SRE) on testing the alpha and beta versions of HMMER3 to ensure that it is stable enough to adopt in Pfam database-production pipelines. For the production of Pfam 24.0, HMMER3 beta 2 version was used.
A limitation of HMMER3 is that it currently computes only local alignments. HMMER2 was capable of calculating either local or glocal (complete model matching one or more times to subsequences of the target sequence) alignments. Until 2002, each family in Pfam was represented by a single profile HMM, where the curator of the family chose whether the model should be in local or glocal mode. From 2002, both local and glocal mode models were constructed from the same seed alignment. The membership of the family and those sequences that made it into the full alignment of a family were based on the union of the significant matches to the glocal and the local models. Under HMMER3, we again construct only a single model from the seed alignment, and that model is in local alignment mode. The parameterisation of HMMER3 local alignment models is sufficiently improved that a single HMMER3 local alignment model generally outperforms the union of HMMER2 local and glocal models. Still, glocal alignment is desirable, because it can sometimes increase sensitivity; when E-value statistics of glocal Forward scores are sufficiently well understood and can be calculated rapidly, a glocal alignment mode option will be restored in HMMER3.
The change to HMMER3 comes at an opportune moment, as the computational burden of making a Pfam release was increasing significantly due to a combination of searching two models per family (local and glocal), the increasing size of sequence databases and the increasing number of Pfam families.
As an example of HMMER3's speed, it now typically takes <5 min to search a profile HMM against the latest version of pfamseq (9.4-million sequences), compared with the $535 min to search the corresponding model using HMMER2 (based on searches with a single Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU, 3.00 GHz). Pfam release 23.0 took $60 CPU years to calculate (searching and post-processing of data), with the vast majority of this time spent in profile HMM searches with HMMER2. Pfam 24.0 took $10 CPU years, despite the near doubling of the sequence database since Pfam 23.0 and the adoption of a more computationally demanding procedure for calculating the trees for each family (described later).

Thresholds and compatibility

The new scoring system of HMMER3 means that all of our families based on HMMER2 needed to have their gathering thresholds re-defining. The gathering threshold is the bit score threshold that a sequence must match or exceed in order for it to be deemed significant and therefore belonging to that family. In Pfam, we manually define our thresholds such that no known false positives are permitted in any family. However, although it is possible to generate HMMER2 style profile HMMs from a HMMER3 profile HMM, the thresholds are not backward compatible. Therefore, it is important to emphasise that Pfam 24.0, based on HMMER3, is not backward compatible with HMMER2. Nevertheless, we believe that the significant increase in performance far outweighs this compatibility issue.

Envelope and alignment domain boundaries

By default, HMMER3 reports two sets of domain coordinates for each profile HMM match. The envelope co-ordinates delineate the region on the sequence where the match has been probabilistically determined to lie, whereas the alignment co-ordinates delineate the region over which HMMER is confident that the alignment of the sequence to the profile HMM is correct. In the Pfam-A full alignments we report only a single set of co-ordinates, the envelope co-ordinates, as these represent the sequencesegment that is aligned to the profile HMM. When an envelope exists, this is represented as insert (lower case) characters at the beginning and/or end of the alignment. On the whole, the envelopes are small extensions (<10 amino acids, mean 2.7 with SD of 7.9 at the N-terminus, and mean of 3.2 and SD of 9.1 at the C-terminus) at either end of the alignment co-ordinates. There are some cases, however, where the envelope start and end range can be significantly longer than the alignment co-ordinate range.
In Pfam, we do not allow overlaps between the alignment co-ordinates of different Pfam-A domains.

FAMILY UPDATES


Numbers of new families

Since the last publication describing Pfam in 2008 (release 22.0), we have added 2871 Pfam-A families and deleted 236. Pfam 24.0 is based on UniProt version 15.6. We also provide our match-data against NCBI GenPept (version 172) and a collection of metagenomic samples.
Pfam 24.0 represents a 24% increase in the total number of families, relative to Pfam 23.0. Most of these new families have come from one of two sources: (i) a family seeded by a structure deposited in the Protein Data Bank-wwPDB (3)-that Pfam 23.0 did not cover, and (ii) Pfam-B families that we have used as a starting point for building Pfam-A, focusing particularly on Pfam-B clusters without a corresponding annotated family in InterPro (4). In addition to these, many families have been contributed via suggestions from the community.

Iteration of families in 23.0

As well as adding new families, we have also revised all 8339 families that were not part of a Pfam clan, where a clan is a collection of Pfam families which we believe to have a common evolutionarily ancestor (5). Pfam has existed since the late 1990s and many of the families added over this 12-year-period have had few, if any, updates since they were first deposited. Consequently, the seed alignments that were used to construct the profile HMMs were built from sequence databases that did not contain the diverse range of species that they do today. As the seed alignment is intended to contain representative members of a protein family, we have tried to improve our seed alignments for each family, through a process we refer to as iteration. This process starts with the full alignment for a family and attempts to make a new non-redundant seed alignment from it. During this process, any fragment matches are removed as are other sequences containing insertions and deletions that are likely to be incorrect. The alignment is typically made non-redundant so that no pair of sequences shares more than 80% sequence identity. The new profile HMM generated from this seed alignment is searched against the sequence database, and during this process, a proportion of families modified in this way should have captured new and more distant homologues. Having iterated every family not in a Pfam clan, 50% of these were found to have expanded with additional homologues, and their profile HMMs now have the more divergent sequence amino acid substitutions, insertions and deletions modelled in them. We intend to iterate families that belong to clans in the future.
Although in most cases the improvements to any one family were modest, some families gained many hundreds of new members. For example, the Rhodanese domain (Pfam accession PF00581) gained 1483 new sequences during iteration. Expansion also indicated hitherto unseen inter-family relationships, such that families could be merged together into a single entity. An example of one such merge is the uncharacterised family DUF30 (Pfam accession PF01727), which was found to be closely related to Peptidase_S7 (Pfam accession PF00949) and was therefore merged into that family.

INCREASE IN COVERAGE

One of the goals of Pfam is to be as comprehensive as we can be, so that as many sequences as possible fall into one of our families. Therefore, we closely monitor both the sequence coverage of Pfam (the proportion of sequences with at least one match to a Pfam-A) and the residue coverage (the proportion of residues that are matched by Pfam-A), particularly between one release and the next. Although these headline numbers regarding coverage are accurate, they do not represent a truly fair comparison between the current and previous releases. The dramatic increase in the number of sequences in the sequence database between Pfam 23.0 and 24.0 serves to mask an equally dramatic increase in coverage.
To make the comparison fairer, we can base it on the intersection between the two releases of Pfam in terms of families and sequences. Thus, if we consider only those sequences that are common to both Pfam 23.0 and Pfam 24.0, and only the families that are present in both 23.0 and 24.0, we observe an increase of 0.85 percentage points in sequence coverage and an increase of 1 percentage point in residue coverage. These increases are due to a combination of two factors: (i) improvements to our existing families achieved through the iteration process, and (ii) the increased sensitivity of HMMER3, as compared to HMMER2. Of the families that were present in both releases 23.0 and 24.0, 4782 families gained members, 2214 families did not change in size and 3104 families decreased in size. Of those 3104 families that decreased in size, only 974 lost more than 10 member sequences.
Close analysis of the families that have lost sequences reveals that the types of losses fall into three broad categories. The first is losses due simply to a difference in the distribution of sequences between families belonging to the same clan. For example, the ig (Pfam accession PF00047) and I-set (Pfam accession PF07679) families both belong to the Ig clan (Pfam clan accession CL0011); whilst the ig domain has lost 2365 sequences, the V-set has gained 1067 sequences, and with the other clan members gaining small numbers this gives comparable numbers of sequences matched amongst the clan members between the two releases.
The second category is losses largely confined to viralspecific families, such as HCV_NS1 (Pfam accession PF01560) and RVT_connect (Pfam accession PF06815), which have both lost thousands of members. This has been caused by sequence fragments, typically of <15 amino acids in length, being detected at the extreme N-and/or C-termini of families by HMMER2 but not by HMMER3. Many viral families will be affected in this way as UniProt contains many fragments of viral proteins, especially of polyproteins.
The third category results from a loss of sensitivity in a few, very specific HMMER3 models compared to their HMMER2 counterparts. These models fall into two subcategories: (i) very short repeats, e.g. Hexapep (Pfam accession PF00132) and Ank (Pfam accession PF00023), and (ii) short, very divergent families, e.g. zf-C2H2 (Pfam accession PF00096) and HATPase_c (Pfam accession PF02518). All of the families that fall into this third category are symptomatic of the same feature, the match is not sufficiently long enough for the signal to be distinguishable from the noise. This is quite easy to understand for the very short repeats (subcategory (i) above). Those families in subcategory (ii) are a little harder to explain. All of these families were 'tuned' effectively to HMMER2's glocal alignment (a complete domain with respect to the query model, local in the target sequence). Such families have typically short models containing <100 consensus residues with lots of extremely diverse sequences in the alignment (low average sequence identity). This gives rise to the situation where the average score per homologous position is low across a short model such that true homologues are just barely resolvable from the noise even when all consensus residues are aligned. In local alignments (HMMER3's default and only mode), the probability theory assesses an extra bit score penalty of log_2 {2/[M(M + 1)]} (for the extra freedom of finding start/end positions anywhere in a model of consensus length M) which works out to $ À12 bits for a model of M = 100. If the true homologues were resolvable from noise by <12 bits by glocal alignment, then, in local alignments they might well become indistinguishable from the noise. As the Pfam curated gathering thresholds are set such that no known false positives are included in the family we are excluding these sequences that are in the top of the noise.
We intend to address the issuses of these poorly performing families with respect to HMMER2, by building multiple HMMs to represent the family, with each HMM being built from a seed alignment containing more closely related homologues. The new families will be grouped into a clan to represent the divergent family. Addressing this issue will be a priority of the curation process between Pfam 24.0 and 25.0.

Improved sensitivity

So, what has the improved sensitivity of HMMER3 achieved? We have so far focused on sequence coverage and have said less about residue coverage. The increase in residue coverage by nearly 2 percentage points is quite remarkable. In the last 5 years, our residue coverage between releases has fluctuated by only fractions of 1 percentage point. The current change clearly indicates that although we are not finding substantially more matches on sequences that do not already match a Pfam-A family, we are matching more residues on sequences where we do already have a Pfam-A match.
The increase in residue coverage comes from one or both of two sources, namely longer length matches and matches to additional domains on a sequence. Although the improvements to the HMMER3 local model have meant that local matches are longer, prior to release 24.0 we typically took glocal matches in preference to local ones. Our analysis of the unique domain architectures, where a domain architecture is defined as a particular combination of Pfam-A families, shows that there has been a 67% increase (from 48 634 to 72 629) in the number of distinct architectures between Pfam 23.0 and Pfam 24.0. Of the 4.9-million sequences common to the sequence databases of releases 23.0 and 24.0, 11.4% of them have changed domain architecture.
Another way in which the increased sensitivity has affected Pfam is that we have detected many more similarities between families due to sequence regions significantly matching more than one Pfam HMM. These relationships were predominantly identified after building HMMER3 models for all of the Pfam seed alignments, and searching them against the same sequence database on which Pfam 23.0 was built. These search results showed that the increased sensitivity of HMMER3 had expanded many of our families, but that $80 000 sequences now had overlapping matches to more than one Pfam family. Since we do not allow overlaps between alignment co-ordinates, each of these overlaps had to be resolved.
There are a number of reasons why overlaps might arise: (i) families overlap by only a few end residues, so we will trim the domain boundaries such that the two families no longer overlap, (ii) the sequence(s) that have the overlap are false positives in one or other of the families, so here we raise the threshold in that family such that the sequence is excluded, and this helps to maintain the high quality of the Pfam data, and (iii) two or more families may share full-length matches, so, depending on the degree of similarity between them, these families may be merged into one or be grouped together into a clan.
Many of the overlaps generated by HMMER3 were due to reason (iii). We always preferentially merge families if we can build a single HMM model that detects both sets of sequences. This explains why the number of deleted families at Pfam 24.0 was so high (236 families were deleted). For example, DUF223 (Pfam accession PF03027), a family of moth juvenile hormone binding proteins and Drosophila proteins of unknown function has been merged into JHBP (Pfam accession PF06585) which is a family of insect specific haemolymph juvenile hormone binding proteins. However, more often than not, the two families will be too divergent to make a single HMM, but the overlaps have allowed us to identify and/or confirm relationships between them for which we previously had insufficient evidence. Using the HMMER3 overlap data together with profile comparison data from PRC (6) and SCOOP (7), and structural data, we were able to assign many families to existing clans, and since Pfam 23.0 we have created 120 new clans. We have also been able to merge some existing clans (listed in Table 1), showing that we are bringing together groups of families previously thought to belong to different structural superfamilies.
In Pfam release 24.0, 3131 out of 11 912 families (26.3%) belong to a clan, compared with 2009 out of 10 340 families (19.4%) in Pfam release 23.0. Notably, the families that typically belong to clans correspond to the larger families in Pfam, so that over 57.3% (up by 11.9% since Pfam 23.0) of our sequence annotations come from families falling within the clan hierarchical classification.

Proteome coverages

While we have focused on the highs and lows in terms of performance, there is an overall trend towards an increase in coverage. A more fine grained way of assessing the difference in coverage between Pfam 23.0 and Pfam 24.0 is to take the proteomes from completed genomes, present in both releases, and look at the differences in sequence and residue coverage of a range of these individually to see how coverage has changed (Table 2). Generally, we observe an increase that is comparable or higher to the gross coverage gains. When a similar analysis was performed in 2000 (8), the eukaryotic genomes lagged behind bacterial genomes in both sequence and residue coverage. For many of the model organims such as human and yeast, the sequence coverage is more on a par with bacterial sequence coverage. The increase in coverage is down to many factors that include better gene builds, more eukaryotic homologues in the sequence database and improved models in Pfam. Instances where the coverage has fallen between the two releases can often be attributed to new assemblies (e.g. Danio rerio) and the lag time for that new data to percolate through to the relevant databases.

Improved Pfam-B coverage

To aid our goal of comprehensively covering the whole of sequence space, we generate a set of automated families in addition to our curated Pfam-A families. The automated families are called Pfam-B families and are built from homologous sequence clusters. Each Pfam-B is represented by a single alignment and has no associated profile HMM or accompanying annotation. In previous releases of Pfam, Pfam-B families were generated by taking clusters derived from MSP-crunch and latterly PRODOM (9) clusters, and removing regions covered by Pfam-A families to leave a set of Pfam-B clusters (10). The PRODOM database is updated infrequently which means that newly deposited sequences may not be incorporated into a PRODOM cluster for a long time. Thus if, in the meantime, Pfam updates to a more recent sequence database, the sequence coverage of Pfam contributed by Pfam-B will be much lower than it might be. The ADDA algorithm has been used from Pfam release 23.0 onwards, to generate the Pfam-B families.
ADDA is a method for automatically predicting protein sequence domains from protein sequence alignments alone. Briefly, the ADDA algorithm takes a set of nonredundant sequences (11,12) and aligns them all-versus-all using BLAST (2). Sequences are then partitioned into domains by optimising an objective function that penalises domains that (i) split alignments or (ii) overlap with alignments only partially. The resultant domains are grouped into clusters using pairwise profile-profile comparisons. The whole procedure is calibrated using SCOP (13) domains as a gold-standard.
The current ADDA core is based on a non-redundant sequence data set from a 2007 snapshot of Uniprot with 3 378 785 sequences, 6 181 472 domains and 270 191 nonsingleton families. The ADDA core is projected onto the latest sequence data set using BLAT (14) with a 40% sequence identity cut-off. After mapping, ADDA assigns 8 119 847 domains to 11 626 194 sequences in 303 153 nonsingleton families. On average, 83% (median: 97%) of amino acid residues in protein sequences are covered by domains. Updating the ADDA core is currently a 'work in progress'. For Pfam-B generation, we take clusters of multiple sequence alignments and subtract the regions covered by Pfam-A, as described previously in detail in ref. (10). We use MAFFT to create multiple sequence alignments from the sequence co-ordinates of each ADDA cluster, for clusters that contain between 2 and 1000 sequences and comprise more than 40 amino acids. This process sheds only $2500 ADDA clusters, most of which are already covered by Pfam-A regions. In Pfam 24.0, from the 300 422 ADDA clusters that fulfil this criterion, we have built 142 303 Pfam-B families.
In Pfam release 23.0, where ADDA was used for the first time, the sequence coverage contributed by Pfam-B increased substantially from what would have been 3.9% with PRODOM, to 11.8%. Due to the increased coverage provided by Pfam-A in release 24.0, the fact that many new families have been built starting from the largest Pfam-Bs in Pfam 23.0 and that the ADDA core is becoming more out of date, this coverage has dropped, but still provides 5.7% additional sequence coverage, and contributes 5.8% additional residue coverage. We expect future releases of Pfam to be correlated with updates to the ADDA core, and expect the coverage provided by Pfam-B to rise once more. Despite the lower than ideal coverage contribution provided from Pfam-B, the combined coverage provided by Pfam-A and Pfam-B is 80.9% for sequence coverage and 58.8% for residue coverage.

STREAMLINING OF THE PFAM PIPELINE

As part of switching to HMMER3, we have identified additional bottlenecks in the database production pipeline in terms of potential scalability and/or computational time. Our aim has been to perform the same quality control checks and post-processing on a family regardless of size (i.e. scale from 2 to 100 000 sequences), while ideally reducing the computational burden imposed by the production pipeline.

Neighbour-joining trees using FastTree

Prior to Pfam release 24.0, the 'QuickTree' software (15) was used to produce UPGMA-based phylogenetic trees for ordering the sequences contained in the full and seed alignments for each Pfam family. From release 23.0 onwards we started to provide the more accurate, but computationally more intensive, neighbour-joining (NJ) tree for families with <20 000 members. We were, however, unable to provide bootstrap values for the NJ trees as these were too time consuming to compute. Furthermore, for our larger families, producing the faster and computationally cheaper UPGMA tree using QuickTree could take up to 3 days, and was also proving to be memory intensive.
From release 24.0 we have moved to using the 'FastTree' software (16) to produce NJ trees with

Family comparisons

To detect relationships between families we perform profile-profile comparisons between all profile HMMs.
In the past we used the profile comparison software 'PRC' (6); however, the profile-profile comparison software 'HHsearch' (17) is $10 times faster, with both pieces of software producing comparable results. Therefore, we have switched to using the faster HHsearch software. Profile-profile comparison results are shown on the family summary page, alongside results from SCOOP family comparisons. Profile-profile comparison results are also used to construct the clan relationship images (e.g. http://pfam.sanger.ac. uk/clan?acc=CL0012), where the relationship between families is depicted as a graph (families are nodes, relationships are edges between the nodes).

Data version control

All Pfam-A family and clan data files are now under version control using Subversion (SVN -http://subversion.tigris.org). We have modified our pipelines to tightly couple commits of changes to quality-control checks and population of the underlying MySQL database. We will shortly be making our SVN repository externally accessible using the HTTPS protocol. Readaccess to the repository will be granted to all, thereby allowing users access to pre-released versions of our data. Furthermore, this system will open up the opportunity for trained collaborators outside the Pfam consortium to add and modify families and clans using our software. We expect this system to be fully operational by the beginning of 2010.

Changes to the underlying MySQL database

The changes caused by migration to using HMMER3 have necessitated numerous alterations to the database schema. We have also moved from using the MyISAM table-engine (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MyISAM) to using InnoDB (http://www.innodb.com). Although it is not appropriate to discuss the pros and cons of different table-engines here, one of the fundamental differences between the two is that InnoDB supports foreign key relationships, i.e. there is declarative referential integrity. In addition to improving data quality-control, InnoDB also makes the schema (containing 63 tables) easier to understand and to write queries against.

NEW WEBSITE FEATURES


Interactive sequence searches

One of the primary user entry-points into the website is via a sequence search. We have already described the speed improvement achieved with HMMER3 and this improvement means that single sequence searches are now interactive. A search of a sequence of 500 amino acids takes <0.5 s against the current HMM library, using hmmscan (hmmscan is the HMMER3 program that replaces the hmmpfam program in HMMER2). Given the speed of hmmscan in HMMER3, we have decided to use an HMM-based approach for detecting matches to Pfam-Bs. In the past, Pfam-B matches were detected in query sequences by a BLAST search of the query against a fasta file containing all of the Pfam-B regions. However, this approach often gave rise to many partial Pfam-B matches to the query sequence, making these matches less useful. To improve the sensitivity and specificity of Pfam-B searches and to ensure that the search results return interactively, we have taken the 20 000 largest Pfam-Bs (Pfam-B accessions PB000001 to PB020000) and built HMMs from the Pfam-B multiple sequence aligments. The query sequence is searched against the Pfam-B HMMs with a default E-value cutoff of 0.001. When multi-threaded versions of HMMER3 become available, we anticipate expanding the Pfam-B HMM library to include all Pfam-Bs.
The sequence search results table which displays the matches to Pfam is much the same as before with the exception that we now include both the envelope and the alignment co-ordinates as well as information about whether the matched family belongs to a clan. As the user moves their mouse pointer over the 'significant hits' table the domain corresponding to that row is highlighted in the domain architecture graphic by a grey bar. The biggest change to the content of the results page comes when the user chooses to show the alignment between the query sequence and the HMM (see Figure 1). The query sequence is colour-coded according to the posteriorprobability, given in the #PP line. The HMM is now colour-coded according to the amino acid similarity between the most probable sequence, which is shown in the #HMM line, and the query sequence, #SEQ. Identical residues are coloured cyan, while similar residues are coloured dark blue.

Additional family page features

Displaying the domain architecture of proteins. We have adapted the way that protein domains are graphically represented on a sequence such that we are now able to depict both the envelope and the alignment co-ordinates. As before, Pfam-A families classified as type 'repeat' or 'motif' are represented by rectangles and families with type 'family' and 'domain' with a lozenge shape. Where the profile HMM match for a domain or family is only of partial length, the curved end of the lozenge/rectangle is replaced by a jagged edge, as depicted in Figure 2. Envelope regions are shown as a lighter shade of the colour used to colour the alignment region. As most envelope regions are small and we draw most of our graphics at 1 or 2 amino acids per pixel, for the majority of cases the envelope regions are barely visible. To provide more information to our users, we have expanded the information contained in the 'tool tips', to include both the domain and the envelope co-ordinates as well as the short descriptor of the family. In addition to indicating known and predicted active-site residues found in UniProt (18) and Pfam (19), which are represented as lollipops with a diamond-shaped head, we now also indicate the metal-binding residues defined in UniProt, represented as lollipops with a square-shaped head.
We have re-factored the mechanisms by which the domain architectures of sequences are generated.
Previously, each of the graphics would be generated as a temporary image that was served by a separate request to the web server. At busy times, we were generating thousands of temporary images per minute and serving them. To avoid the load of generating and serving the domain architecture images on the server, we now use a javascript library that we have written to render the images within the client browser.
Alignment confidence display. Another feature of HMMER3 is that as the searches are now based on the Forward algorithm, there is a probabilistic inference of alignment uncertainty. This is recorded as a posterior probability for each amino acid that is matched to a profile HMM. We have taken these posterior probabilities and converted the data into a heat map-style representation of the alignment. When the alignment of an amino acid to a match state in the profile HMM is estimated to be correct, then this amino acid is shown in upper case with its background colour shown in green. As the alignment certainty diminishes, the colour becomes closer to red. The same colouring scheme is employed for inserts, with confidently assigned inserts being coloured green. At the boundaries between inserts and matches, there tends to be less certainty about the accuracy of the alignment and hence residues here are coloured in tones closer to red. Posterior probabilities are calculated when a sequence is aligned to the profile HMM, therefore this feature is only available for our full alignments (see Figure 3) and not for our seed alignments.

HMM-logos.

For each Pfam-A family we now include a graphical representation of the HMM, using the 'logomatm' software (20). These HMM logos are found on a separate tab for each family and are embedded in a scrollable window.
Family protein sets. One of our most frequent userrequests of late has been the ability to download the set of UniProt sequences that belong to a particular family as a FASTA file. This has now been added as a download option, with the title 'full-length sequences', within the alignments section of the family web pages.

TreeFam links

TreeFam is a database of phylogenetic trees of eukaryotic genes that contains orthologue and paralogue assignments in addition to information regarding the evolutionary history of various gene families (21). We now provide reciprocal links to TreeFam from the Protein pages on the website as there is not a one-to-one relationship between Pfam-A entries and TreeFam entries. To further complicate the linking, TreeFam is based on a collection of protein sequences drawn from several different databases. To set-up the links to TreeFam, we cross reference the MD5 checksums of the protein sequences contained in Pfam with those found in TreeFam families. When a link is available, we display the TreeFam phylogenetic tree within our protein page.

Improvements to the scientific annotations

The annotation provided in Pfam for each family is a brief synopsis of the function of the family. Although we endeavour to keep these summaries up-to-date, it is becoming an ever increasingly difficult task as the numbers of families and the sequences they contain grow.
Identifying functional data from papers is timeconsuming, as more often than not, protein sequenceidentifiers are rarely used in any standard format. However, for protein structures, the PDB represents the single repository for such data, and consequently the PDB identifiers are a common standard format. Text-mining of full text articles for terms such as these protein-identifiers is becoming a fruitful way of identifying articles of interest. The new website will be utilising the Web services provide by BioLit (22) which allows access to metadata describing the semantic content of all open access, peer-reviewed articles (in PubMed Central) based on a PDB identifier. Whenever an article is found to contain a PDB identifier, we will use the Web services to retrieve the abstract, figures and figure legends from that article and make them available on our pages. Unfortunately, not all articles are published in open access journals, so this feature will not appear on every structure page.
The efforts from the field of structural genomics are depositing more and more structures with no associated publication. For many structural genomics targets there is additional information about the structure available in the 'The Open Protein Structure Annotation Network' (TOPSAN) wiki. As with BioLit, we are using Web Services to retrieve information contained within the TOPSAN wiki and display it on our protein structure pages. In addition to the retrieval of images and text, we also provide links to TOPSAN so that users can actively add to the content of the wiki. A screenshot of these two features-BioLit and TOPSAN-is shown in Figure 4. Pfam-A families classified as type 'family' and 'domain' with a lozenge shape, and families with type 'repeat' or 'motif' are represented by rectangles. The alignment co-ordinates are depitcted with a solid colour, and the envelope coordianates in a lighter shade of this colour. Where the profile HMM match for a domain or family is only of partial length, the curved end of the lozenge/rectangle is replaced by a jagged edge. Active-site residues are marked with a lollipop with a diamond-shaped head. An example tooltip showing the domain description, co-ordinates and source is shown for the fourth domain. Note the overlapping envelopes between fourth and fifth domains.

DAS ontology compliance

As described in the 2008 paper, in addition to the website and our RESTful interface, we also provide much of the data contained in Pfam via the distributed annotation system (DAS). DAS is a system for disseminating annotations and alignments of DNA or protein sequences through a simple, web-based protocol. Previously, we separated out our family annotations (both Pfam-A and Pfam-B) from other sequence annotations such as active-sites and transmembrane region predictions, such that we had two DAS features servers. Based on monitoring of our access logs and feedback from the community, we have combined the domain annotations for Pfam families and the additional sequence annotations into a single DAS features source. Furthermore, we have adapted the features response so that it conforms to the ontology standards set out for DAS feature servers (23).
Making our DAS features source ontology-compliant, along with others, allows DAS clients to readily group features of similar types, thereby allowing comparisons of data without the need to make bespoke parsers for each DAS source.

LOCAL PFAM SEARCHES WITH PFAM_SCAN

To allow users to run Pfam locally we distribute a software tool called 'pfam_scan'. The pfam_scan tool is a Perl wrapper around the HMMER package that allows protein sequences (in FASTA format) to be searched against Pfam's library of profile HMMs, with the results post-processed in a similar fashion to that performed internally within Pfam. The original software was written almost a decade ago, and over the years has been modified as problems have been identified (and addressed) and new features implemented. The script is Figure 3. New alignment confidence display. The colour of the residues reflects the alignment uncertainty, and is based on the posterior probability that is calculated by HMMER3. A green residue indicates a high posterior probability which means that the alignment of the amino acid to the match/insert state in the profile HMM is very likely to be correct. Where the posterior probablity is lower, and therefore the alignment certainty decreases, the colour becomes closer to red. This allows users quickly to identify regions of the alignment where some sequences are aligned with less certainty.
used widely by the Pfam user community. We have completely re-written the software to make it compatible with HMMER3. The new version of the pfam_scan script is available for download at ftp://ftp.sanger.ac. uk/pub/databases/Pfam/Tools/PfamScan.tar.gz.
To ensure consistency with Pfam, we wanted to be able to use exactly the same code for running searches on our website as our users would run when carrying out searches on their local machines. We also wanted the new code to be easier to maintain. In order to achieve these aims we have written the new code in a more modular fashion compared to the old version. This has, however, necessitated some changes in the dependencies of the software. In the past, pfam_scan was a standalone Perl script with no external dependencies other than standard Perl library modules and the HMMER programs. Rather than rewriting existing code, in the new version we have used a few modules that can be easily installed from CPAN. The modular nature of the code does mean that it can be more readily incorporated into other third party Perl scripts.
The blog not only allows us to explain our plans, it also allows our users to feedback comments which can open up into discussions. These discussions are recorded and are available for all to read, which is not the case when discussions happen directly with the Pfam team via e-mail.

SUMMARY

We are aware that the changes we have made to Pfam will have a significant impact on the Pfam user community, especially the lack of compatibility between Pfam 24.0 and the releases based on older versions of HMMER; however, we have tried to provide adequate communication of these changes through a variety of media. After careful evaluation of HMMER3 and the impact its adoption will have, we strongly believe that the benefits far outweigh any disadvantages. For example, sequence searches against Pfam HMM libraries can now be routinely run on modern laptops, and large-scale genome or metagenome analyses are no longer daunting in terms of their computational requirements. The increased sensitivity that our models now have is pivotal for improving the understanding of protein biology, with previously distant twilight relationships between proteins now being detectable at a level closely rivalling that found through structural comparisons.

AVAILABILITY

Pfam data can be downloaded directly from the WTSI FTP site (ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/pub/databases/Pfam), either as flat files or in the form of MySQL table dumps. Pfam websites are found at WTSI (http://pfam.sanger.ac .uk/), Stockholm Bioinformatics Center (http://pfam.sbc .su.se/) and Janelia Farm (http://pfam.janelia.org/).
Pfam is a comprehensive database of conserved protein families. This collection of nearly 12 000 families is used extensively throughout the biological sciences, by experimental biologists researching specific proteins, computational biologists who need to organise sequences, and evolutionary biologists considering the origin and evolution of proteins. Pfam is also widely used in the structural biology community for identifying interesting new targets for structure determination.
From its inception 12 years ago, Pfam has been designed to scale with the growth in the number of new protein sequences deposited. Scalability is achieved by having a set of seed alignments, with each alignment containing a representative set of sequences that are relatively stable between releases of the database. The seed alignments are used to build profile hidden Markov models (HMMs) that can be used to search any sequence database for homologues in a sensitive and accurate fashion. Those homologues that score above the curated inclusion thresholds are aligned against the profile to make a full alignment.
Our goal is to make Pfam a comprehensive and accurate classification of all known protein sequences. The 11 912 curated families are known as Pfam-A and are found in approximately three quarters of known proteins. In order to increase our coverage further, we augment the Pfam-A family collection with a set of automatically generated families called Pfam-B. Pfam-B is derived from the ADDA domain collection (1), which is described later.
Ten years ago, a family with more than 1000 sequences was considered to be large. Today, a growing number of families contain over 100 000 sequences. Depositions from large-scale metagenomic and other sequencing projects mean that we can expect the number of known sequences to grow into the billions, from the millions that we currently have. In order to deal with this explosion in the number of known sequences, we have made fundamental changes to the Pfam infrastructure. The most important of these has been the move to a new version of the profile HMM software, HMMER (http://hmmer .janelia.org/), which we use to build and search our models. Since 1998, Pfam (version 3.0 onwards) has utilised the HMMER2 package for building profile HMMs and searching them against sequences in the underlying sequence database. The new version of HMMER (version 3) is $100 times faster than the previous version and shows increased sensitivity.
In this article, we will describe the major changes that underlie the new version of Pfam (release 24.0) along with the major updates we have made to the families within the collection. We also describe changes made to both the database and to the web site and its associated services.
An alpha version of HMMER3 was released in early 2009. The HMMER3 project has four main aims: (i) to adopt log-odds likelihood scores summed over alignment uncertainty (Forward scores) in place of optimal alignment (Viterbi) scores; (ii) to report posterior probabilities of alignment confidence; (iii) to be able to accurately and quickly calculate expectation values (E-values) for Forward scores (a previously unsolved problem); and (iv) to accelerate previous profile HMM performance by two orders of magnitude and achieve an overall speed competitive with BLAST (2). These goals have been met and the software package is now undergoing testing pending a stable 3.0 release. The outcome of aims (i) and (iii) make HMMER3 more sensitive. The increase in speed arises from a combination of approaches, including the use of vector-parallel SIMD (single instruction multiple data) instructions (SSE2 on Intel-compatible platforms; Altivec/VMX on PowerPC platforms); a new acceleration heuristic; and a 'sparse rescaling' method enabling the Forward and Backward HMM algorithms to be implemented in much faster calculations based on scaled probabilities rather than standard implementation in log probabilities (all to be described more fully in a future paper). The Cambridge Pfam team (especially RDF) has worked closely with the Janelia Farm HMMER team (especially SRE) on testing the alpha and beta versions of HMMER3 to ensure that it is stable enough to adopt in Pfam database-production pipelines. For the production of Pfam 24.0, HMMER3 beta 2 version was used.
A limitation of HMMER3 is that it currently computes only local alignments. HMMER2 was capable of calculating either local or glocal (complete model matching one or more times to subsequences of the target sequence) alignments. Until 2002, each family in Pfam was represented by a single profile HMM, where the curator of the family chose whether the model should be in local or glocal mode. From 2002, both local and glocal mode models were constructed from the same seed alignment. The membership of the family and those sequences that made it into the full alignment of a family were based on the union of the significant matches to the glocal and the local models. Under HMMER3, we again construct only a single model from the seed alignment, and that model is in local alignment mode. The parameterisation of HMMER3 local alignment models is sufficiently improved that a single HMMER3 local alignment model generally outperforms the union of HMMER2 local and glocal models. Still, glocal alignment is desirable, because it can sometimes increase sensitivity; when E-value statistics of glocal Forward scores are sufficiently well understood and can be calculated rapidly, a glocal alignment mode option will be restored in HMMER3.
The change to HMMER3 comes at an opportune moment, as the computational burden of making a Pfam release was increasing significantly due to a combination of searching two models per family (local and glocal), the increasing size of sequence databases and the increasing number of Pfam families.
As an example of HMMER3's speed, it now typically takes <5 min to search a profile HMM against the latest version of pfamseq (9.4-million sequences), compared with the $535 min to search the corresponding model using HMMER2 (based on searches with a single Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU, 3.00 GHz). Pfam release 23.0 took $60 CPU years to calculate (searching and post-processing of data), with the vast majority of this time spent in profile HMM searches with HMMER2. Pfam 24.0 took $10 CPU years, despite the near doubling of the sequence database since Pfam 23.0 and the adoption of a more computationally demanding procedure for calculating the trees for each family (described later).
The new scoring system of HMMER3 means that all of our families based on HMMER2 needed to have their gathering thresholds re-defining. The gathering threshold is the bit score threshold that a sequence must match or exceed in order for it to be deemed significant and therefore belonging to that family. In Pfam, we manually define our thresholds such that no known false positives are permitted in any family. However, although it is possible to generate HMMER2 style profile HMMs from a HMMER3 profile HMM, the thresholds are not backward compatible. Therefore, it is important to emphasise that Pfam 24.0, based on HMMER3, is not backward compatible with HMMER2. Nevertheless, we believe that the significant increase in performance far outweighs this compatibility issue.
By default, HMMER3 reports two sets of domain coordinates for each profile HMM match. The envelope co-ordinates delineate the region on the sequence where the match has been probabilistically determined to lie, whereas the alignment co-ordinates delineate the region over which HMMER is confident that the alignment of the sequence to the profile HMM is correct. In the Pfam-A full alignments we report only a single set of co-ordinates, the envelope co-ordinates, as these represent the sequencesegment that is aligned to the profile HMM. When an envelope exists, this is represented as insert (lower case) characters at the beginning and/or end of the alignment. On the whole, the envelopes are small extensions (<10 amino acids, mean 2.7 with SD of 7.9 at the N-terminus, and mean of 3.2 and SD of 9.1 at the C-terminus) at either end of the alignment co-ordinates. There are some cases, however, where the envelope start and end range can be significantly longer than the alignment co-ordinate range.
In Pfam, we do not allow overlaps between the alignment co-ordinates of different Pfam-A domains.
Since the last publication describing Pfam in 2008 (release 22.0), we have added 2871 Pfam-A families and deleted 236. Pfam 24.0 is based on UniProt version 15.6. We also provide our match-data against NCBI GenPept (version 172) and a collection of metagenomic samples.
Pfam 24.0 represents a 24% increase in the total number of families, relative to Pfam 23.0. Most of these new families have come from one of two sources: (i) a family seeded by a structure deposited in the Protein Data Bank-wwPDB (3)-that Pfam 23.0 did not cover, and (ii) Pfam-B families that we have used as a starting point for building Pfam-A, focusing particularly on Pfam-B clusters without a corresponding annotated family in InterPro (4). In addition to these, many families have been contributed via suggestions from the community.
As well as adding new families, we have also revised all 8339 families that were not part of a Pfam clan, where a clan is a collection of Pfam families which we believe to have a common evolutionarily ancestor (5). Pfam has existed since the late 1990s and many of the families added over this 12-year-period have had few, if any, updates since they were first deposited. Consequently, the seed alignments that were used to construct the profile HMMs were built from sequence databases that did not contain the diverse range of species that they do today. As the seed alignment is intended to contain representative members of a protein family, we have tried to improve our seed alignments for each family, through a process we refer to as iteration. This process starts with the full alignment for a family and attempts to make a new non-redundant seed alignment from it. During this process, any fragment matches are removed as are other sequences containing insertions and deletions that are likely to be incorrect. The alignment is typically made non-redundant so that no pair of sequences shares more than 80% sequence identity. The new profile HMM generated from this seed alignment is searched against the sequence database, and during this process, a proportion of families modified in this way should have captured new and more distant homologues. Having iterated every family not in a Pfam clan, 50% of these were found to have expanded with additional homologues, and their profile HMMs now have the more divergent sequence amino acid substitutions, insertions and deletions modelled in them. We intend to iterate families that belong to clans in the future.
Although in most cases the improvements to any one family were modest, some families gained many hundreds of new members. For example, the Rhodanese domain (Pfam accession PF00581) gained 1483 new sequences during iteration. Expansion also indicated hitherto unseen inter-family relationships, such that families could be merged together into a single entity. An example of one such merge is the uncharacterised family DUF30 (Pfam accession PF01727), which was found to be closely related to Peptidase_S7 (Pfam accession PF00949) and was therefore merged into that family.
One of the goals of Pfam is to be as comprehensive as we can be, so that as many sequences as possible fall into one of our families. Therefore, we closely monitor both the sequence coverage of Pfam (the proportion of sequences with at least one match to a Pfam-A) and the residue coverage (the proportion of residues that are matched by Pfam-A), particularly between one release and the next. Although these headline numbers regarding coverage are accurate, they do not represent a truly fair comparison between the current and previous releases. The dramatic increase in the number of sequences in the sequence database between Pfam 23.0 and 24.0 serves to mask an equally dramatic increase in coverage.
To make the comparison fairer, we can base it on the intersection between the two releases of Pfam in terms of families and sequences. Thus, if we consider only those sequences that are common to both Pfam 23.0 and Pfam 24.0, and only the families that are present in both 23.0 and 24.0, we observe an increase of 0.85 percentage points in sequence coverage and an increase of 1 percentage point in residue coverage. These increases are due to a combination of two factors: (i) improvements to our existing families achieved through the iteration process, and (ii) the increased sensitivity of HMMER3, as compared to HMMER2. Of the families that were present in both releases 23.0 and 24.0, 4782 families gained members, 2214 families did not change in size and 3104 families decreased in size. Of those 3104 families that decreased in size, only 974 lost more than 10 member sequences.
Close analysis of the families that have lost sequences reveals that the types of losses fall into three broad categories. The first is losses due simply to a difference in the distribution of sequences between families belonging to the same clan. For example, the ig (Pfam accession PF00047) and I-set (Pfam accession PF07679) families both belong to the Ig clan (Pfam clan accession CL0011); whilst the ig domain has lost 2365 sequences, the V-set has gained 1067 sequences, and with the other clan members gaining small numbers this gives comparable numbers of sequences matched amongst the clan members between the two releases.
The second category is losses largely confined to viralspecific families, such as HCV_NS1 (Pfam accession PF01560) and RVT_connect (Pfam accession PF06815), which have both lost thousands of members. This has been caused by sequence fragments, typically of <15 amino acids in length, being detected at the extreme N-and/or C-termini of families by HMMER2 but not by HMMER3. Many viral families will be affected in this way as UniProt contains many fragments of viral proteins, especially of polyproteins.
The third category results from a loss of sensitivity in a few, very specific HMMER3 models compared to their HMMER2 counterparts. These models fall into two subcategories: (i) very short repeats, e.g. Hexapep (Pfam accession PF00132) and Ank (Pfam accession PF00023), and (ii) short, very divergent families, e.g. zf-C2H2 (Pfam accession PF00096) and HATPase_c (Pfam accession PF02518). All of the families that fall into this third category are symptomatic of the same feature, the match is not sufficiently long enough for the signal to be distinguishable from the noise. This is quite easy to understand for the very short repeats (subcategory (i) above). Those families in subcategory (ii) are a little harder to explain. All of these families were 'tuned' effectively to HMMER2's glocal alignment (a complete domain with respect to the query model, local in the target sequence). Such families have typically short models containing <100 consensus residues with lots of extremely diverse sequences in the alignment (low average sequence identity). This gives rise to the situation where the average score per homologous position is low across a short model such that true homologues are just barely resolvable from the noise even when all consensus residues are aligned. In local alignments (HMMER3's default and only mode), the probability theory assesses an extra bit score penalty of log_2 {2/[M(M + 1)]} (for the extra freedom of finding start/end positions anywhere in a model of consensus length M) which works out to $ À12 bits for a model of M = 100. If the true homologues were resolvable from noise by <12 bits by glocal alignment, then, in local alignments they might well become indistinguishable from the noise. As the Pfam curated gathering thresholds are set such that no known false positives are included in the family we are excluding these sequences that are in the top of the noise.
We intend to address the issuses of these poorly performing families with respect to HMMER2, by building multiple HMMs to represent the family, with each HMM being built from a seed alignment containing more closely related homologues. The new families will be grouped into a clan to represent the divergent family. Addressing this issue will be a priority of the curation process between Pfam 24.0 and 25.0.
So, what has the improved sensitivity of HMMER3 achieved? We have so far focused on sequence coverage and have said less about residue coverage. The increase in residue coverage by nearly 2 percentage points is quite remarkable. In the last 5 years, our residue coverage between releases has fluctuated by only fractions of 1 percentage point. The current change clearly indicates that although we are not finding substantially more matches on sequences that do not already match a Pfam-A family, we are matching more residues on sequences where we do already have a Pfam-A match.
The increase in residue coverage comes from one or both of two sources, namely longer length matches and matches to additional domains on a sequence. Although the improvements to the HMMER3 local model have meant that local matches are longer, prior to release 24.0 we typically took glocal matches in preference to local ones. Our analysis of the unique domain architectures, where a domain architecture is defined as a particular combination of Pfam-A families, shows that there has been a 67% increase (from 48 634 to 72 629) in the number of distinct architectures between Pfam 23.0 and Pfam 24.0. Of the 4.9-million sequences common to the sequence databases of releases 23.0 and 24.0, 11.4% of them have changed domain architecture.
Another way in which the increased sensitivity has affected Pfam is that we have detected many more similarities between families due to sequence regions significantly matching more than one Pfam HMM. These relationships were predominantly identified after building HMMER3 models for all of the Pfam seed alignments, and searching them against the same sequence database on which Pfam 23.0 was built. These search results showed that the increased sensitivity of HMMER3 had expanded many of our families, but that $80 000 sequences now had overlapping matches to more than one Pfam family. Since we do not allow overlaps between alignment co-ordinates, each of these overlaps had to be resolved.
There are a number of reasons why overlaps might arise: (i) families overlap by only a few end residues, so we will trim the domain boundaries such that the two families no longer overlap, (ii) the sequence(s) that have the overlap are false positives in one or other of the families, so here we raise the threshold in that family such that the sequence is excluded, and this helps to maintain the high quality of the Pfam data, and (iii) two or more families may share full-length matches, so, depending on the degree of similarity between them, these families may be merged into one or be grouped together into a clan.
Many of the overlaps generated by HMMER3 were due to reason (iii). We always preferentially merge families if we can build a single HMM model that detects both sets of sequences. This explains why the number of deleted families at Pfam 24.0 was so high (236 families were deleted). For example, DUF223 (Pfam accession PF03027), a family of moth juvenile hormone binding proteins and Drosophila proteins of unknown function has been merged into JHBP (Pfam accession PF06585) which is a family of insect specific haemolymph juvenile hormone binding proteins. However, more often than not, the two families will be too divergent to make a single HMM, but the overlaps have allowed us to identify and/or confirm relationships between them for which we previously had insufficient evidence. Using the HMMER3 overlap data together with profile comparison data from PRC (6) and SCOOP (7), and structural data, we were able to assign many families to existing clans, and since Pfam 23.0 we have created 120 new clans. We have also been able to merge some existing clans (listed in Table 1), showing that we are bringing together groups of families previously thought to belong to different structural superfamilies.
In Pfam release 24.0, 3131 out of 11 912 families (26.3%) belong to a clan, compared with 2009 out of 10 340 families (19.4%) in Pfam release 23.0. Notably, the families that typically belong to clans correspond to the larger families in Pfam, so that over 57.3% (up by 11.9% since Pfam 23.0) of our sequence annotations come from families falling within the clan hierarchical classification.
While we have focused on the highs and lows in terms of performance, there is an overall trend towards an increase in coverage. A more fine grained way of assessing the difference in coverage between Pfam 23.0 and Pfam 24.0 is to take the proteomes from completed genomes, present in both releases, and look at the differences in sequence and residue coverage of a range of these individually to see how coverage has changed (Table 2). Generally, we observe an increase that is comparable or higher to the gross coverage gains. When a similar analysis was performed in 2000 (8), the eukaryotic genomes lagged behind bacterial genomes in both sequence and residue coverage. For many of the model organims such as human and yeast, the sequence coverage is more on a par with bacterial sequence coverage. The increase in coverage is down to many factors that include better gene builds, more eukaryotic homologues in the sequence database and improved models in Pfam. Instances where the coverage has fallen between the two releases can often be attributed to new assemblies (e.g. Danio rerio) and the lag time for that new data to percolate through to the relevant databases.
To aid our goal of comprehensively covering the whole of sequence space, we generate a set of automated families in addition to our curated Pfam-A families. The automated families are called Pfam-B families and are built from homologous sequence clusters. Each Pfam-B is represented by a single alignment and has no associated profile HMM or accompanying annotation. In previous releases of Pfam, Pfam-B families were generated by taking clusters derived from MSP-crunch and latterly PRODOM (9) clusters, and removing regions covered by Pfam-A families to leave a set of Pfam-B clusters (10). The PRODOM database is updated infrequently which means that newly deposited sequences may not be incorporated into a PRODOM cluster for a long time. Thus if, in the meantime, Pfam updates to a more recent sequence database, the sequence coverage of Pfam contributed by Pfam-B will be much lower than it might be. The ADDA algorithm has been used from Pfam release 23.0 onwards, to generate the Pfam-B families.
ADDA is a method for automatically predicting protein sequence domains from protein sequence alignments alone. Briefly, the ADDA algorithm takes a set of nonredundant sequences (11,12) and aligns them all-versus-all using BLAST (2). Sequences are then partitioned into domains by optimising an objective function that penalises domains that (i) split alignments or (ii) overlap with alignments only partially. The resultant domains are grouped into clusters using pairwise profile-profile comparisons. The whole procedure is calibrated using SCOP (13) domains as a gold-standard.
The current ADDA core is based on a non-redundant sequence data set from a 2007 snapshot of Uniprot with 3 378 785 sequences, 6 181 472 domains and 270 191 nonsingleton families. The ADDA core is projected onto the latest sequence data set using BLAT (14) with a 40% sequence identity cut-off. After mapping, ADDA assigns 8 119 847 domains to 11 626 194 sequences in 303 153 nonsingleton families. On average, 83% (median: 97%) of amino acid residues in protein sequences are covered by domains. Updating the ADDA core is currently a 'work in progress'. For Pfam-B generation, we take clusters of multiple sequence alignments and subtract the regions covered by Pfam-A, as described previously in detail in ref. (10). We use MAFFT to create multiple sequence alignments from the sequence co-ordinates of each ADDA cluster, for clusters that contain between 2 and 1000 sequences and comprise more than 40 amino acids. This process sheds only $2500 ADDA clusters, most of which are already covered by Pfam-A regions. In Pfam 24.0, from the 300 422 ADDA clusters that fulfil this criterion, we have built 142 303 Pfam-B families.
In Pfam release 23.0, where ADDA was used for the first time, the sequence coverage contributed by Pfam-B increased substantially from what would have been 3.9% with PRODOM, to 11.8%. Due to the increased coverage provided by Pfam-A in release 24.0, the fact that many new families have been built starting from the largest Pfam-Bs in Pfam 23.0 and that the ADDA core is becoming more out of date, this coverage has dropped, but still provides 5.7% additional sequence coverage, and contributes 5.8% additional residue coverage. We expect future releases of Pfam to be correlated with updates to the ADDA core, and expect the coverage provided by Pfam-B to rise once more. Despite the lower than ideal coverage contribution provided from Pfam-B, the combined coverage provided by Pfam-A and Pfam-B is 80.9% for sequence coverage and 58.8% for residue coverage.
As part of switching to HMMER3, we have identified additional bottlenecks in the database production pipeline in terms of potential scalability and/or computational time. Our aim has been to perform the same quality control checks and post-processing on a family regardless of size (i.e. scale from 2 to 100 000 sequences), while ideally reducing the computational burden imposed by the production pipeline.
Prior to Pfam release 24.0, the 'QuickTree' software (15) was used to produce UPGMA-based phylogenetic trees for ordering the sequences contained in the full and seed alignments for each Pfam family. From release 23.0 onwards we started to provide the more accurate, but computationally more intensive, neighbour-joining (NJ) tree for families with <20 000 members. We were, however, unable to provide bootstrap values for the NJ trees as these were too time consuming to compute. Furthermore, for our larger families, producing the faster and computationally cheaper UPGMA tree using QuickTree could take up to 3 days, and was also proving to be memory intensive.
From release 24.0 we have moved to using the 'FastTree' software (16) to produce NJ trees with
To detect relationships between families we perform profile-profile comparisons between all profile HMMs.
In the past we used the profile comparison software 'PRC' (6); however, the profile-profile comparison software 'HHsearch' (17) is $10 times faster, with both pieces of software producing comparable results. Therefore, we have switched to using the faster HHsearch software. Profile-profile comparison results are shown on the family summary page, alongside results from SCOOP family comparisons. Profile-profile comparison results are also used to construct the clan relationship images (e.g. http://pfam.sanger.ac. uk/clan?acc=CL0012), where the relationship between families is depicted as a graph (families are nodes, relationships are edges between the nodes).
All Pfam-A family and clan data files are now under version control using Subversion (SVN -http://subversion.tigris.org). We have modified our pipelines to tightly couple commits of changes to quality-control checks and population of the underlying MySQL database. We will shortly be making our SVN repository externally accessible using the HTTPS protocol. Readaccess to the repository will be granted to all, thereby allowing users access to pre-released versions of our data. Furthermore, this system will open up the opportunity for trained collaborators outside the Pfam consortium to add and modify families and clans using our software. We expect this system to be fully operational by the beginning of 2010.
The changes caused by migration to using HMMER3 have necessitated numerous alterations to the database schema. We have also moved from using the MyISAM table-engine (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MyISAM) to using InnoDB (http://www.innodb.com). Although it is not appropriate to discuss the pros and cons of different table-engines here, one of the fundamental differences between the two is that InnoDB supports foreign key relationships, i.e. there is declarative referential integrity. In addition to improving data quality-control, InnoDB also makes the schema (containing 63 tables) easier to understand and to write queries against.
One of the primary user entry-points into the website is via a sequence search. We have already described the speed improvement achieved with HMMER3 and this improvement means that single sequence searches are now interactive. A search of a sequence of 500 amino acids takes <0.5 s against the current HMM library, using hmmscan (hmmscan is the HMMER3 program that replaces the hmmpfam program in HMMER2). Given the speed of hmmscan in HMMER3, we have decided to use an HMM-based approach for detecting matches to Pfam-Bs. In the past, Pfam-B matches were detected in query sequences by a BLAST search of the query against a fasta file containing all of the Pfam-B regions. However, this approach often gave rise to many partial Pfam-B matches to the query sequence, making these matches less useful. To improve the sensitivity and specificity of Pfam-B searches and to ensure that the search results return interactively, we have taken the 20 000 largest Pfam-Bs (Pfam-B accessions PB000001 to PB020000) and built HMMs from the Pfam-B multiple sequence aligments. The query sequence is searched against the Pfam-B HMMs with a default E-value cutoff of 0.001. When multi-threaded versions of HMMER3 become available, we anticipate expanding the Pfam-B HMM library to include all Pfam-Bs.
The sequence search results table which displays the matches to Pfam is much the same as before with the exception that we now include both the envelope and the alignment co-ordinates as well as information about whether the matched family belongs to a clan. As the user moves their mouse pointer over the 'significant hits' table the domain corresponding to that row is highlighted in the domain architecture graphic by a grey bar. The biggest change to the content of the results page comes when the user chooses to show the alignment between the query sequence and the HMM (see Figure 1). The query sequence is colour-coded according to the posteriorprobability, given in the #PP line. The HMM is now colour-coded according to the amino acid similarity between the most probable sequence, which is shown in the #HMM line, and the query sequence, #SEQ. Identical residues are coloured cyan, while similar residues are coloured dark blue.
Displaying the domain architecture of proteins. We have adapted the way that protein domains are graphically represented on a sequence such that we are now able to depict both the envelope and the alignment co-ordinates. As before, Pfam-A families classified as type 'repeat' or 'motif' are represented by rectangles and families with type 'family' and 'domain' with a lozenge shape. Where the profile HMM match for a domain or family is only of partial length, the curved end of the lozenge/rectangle is replaced by a jagged edge, as depicted in Figure 2. Envelope regions are shown as a lighter shade of the colour used to colour the alignment region. As most envelope regions are small and we draw most of our graphics at 1 or 2 amino acids per pixel, for the majority of cases the envelope regions are barely visible. To provide more information to our users, we have expanded the information contained in the 'tool tips', to include both the domain and the envelope co-ordinates as well as the short descriptor of the family. In addition to indicating known and predicted active-site residues found in UniProt (18) and Pfam (19), which are represented as lollipops with a diamond-shaped head, we now also indicate the metal-binding residues defined in UniProt, represented as lollipops with a square-shaped head.
We have re-factored the mechanisms by which the domain architectures of sequences are generated.
Previously, each of the graphics would be generated as a temporary image that was served by a separate request to the web server. At busy times, we were generating thousands of temporary images per minute and serving them. To avoid the load of generating and serving the domain architecture images on the server, we now use a javascript library that we have written to render the images within the client browser.
Alignment confidence display. Another feature of HMMER3 is that as the searches are now based on the Forward algorithm, there is a probabilistic inference of alignment uncertainty. This is recorded as a posterior probability for each amino acid that is matched to a profile HMM. We have taken these posterior probabilities and converted the data into a heat map-style representation of the alignment. When the alignment of an amino acid to a match state in the profile HMM is estimated to be correct, then this amino acid is shown in upper case with its background colour shown in green. As the alignment certainty diminishes, the colour becomes closer to red. The same colouring scheme is employed for inserts, with confidently assigned inserts being coloured green. At the boundaries between inserts and matches, there tends to be less certainty about the accuracy of the alignment and hence residues here are coloured in tones closer to red. Posterior probabilities are calculated when a sequence is aligned to the profile HMM, therefore this feature is only available for our full alignments (see Figure 3) and not for our seed alignments.
For each Pfam-A family we now include a graphical representation of the HMM, using the 'logomatm' software (20). These HMM logos are found on a separate tab for each family and are embedded in a scrollable window.
Family protein sets. One of our most frequent userrequests of late has been the ability to download the set of UniProt sequences that belong to a particular family as a FASTA file. This has now been added as a download option, with the title 'full-length sequences', within the alignments section of the family web pages.
TreeFam is a database of phylogenetic trees of eukaryotic genes that contains orthologue and paralogue assignments in addition to information regarding the evolutionary history of various gene families (21). We now provide reciprocal links to TreeFam from the Protein pages on the website as there is not a one-to-one relationship between Pfam-A entries and TreeFam entries. To further complicate the linking, TreeFam is based on a collection of protein sequences drawn from several different databases. To set-up the links to TreeFam, we cross reference the MD5 checksums of the protein sequences contained in Pfam with those found in TreeFam families. When a link is available, we display the TreeFam phylogenetic tree within our protein page.
The annotation provided in Pfam for each family is a brief synopsis of the function of the family. Although we endeavour to keep these summaries up-to-date, it is becoming an ever increasingly difficult task as the numbers of families and the sequences they contain grow.
Identifying functional data from papers is timeconsuming, as more often than not, protein sequenceidentifiers are rarely used in any standard format. However, for protein structures, the PDB represents the single repository for such data, and consequently the PDB identifiers are a common standard format. Text-mining of full text articles for terms such as these protein-identifiers is becoming a fruitful way of identifying articles of interest. The new website will be utilising the Web services provide by BioLit (22) which allows access to metadata describing the semantic content of all open access, peer-reviewed articles (in PubMed Central) based on a PDB identifier. Whenever an article is found to contain a PDB identifier, we will use the Web services to retrieve the abstract, figures and figure legends from that article and make them available on our pages. Unfortunately, not all articles are published in open access journals, so this feature will not appear on every structure page.
The efforts from the field of structural genomics are depositing more and more structures with no associated publication. For many structural genomics targets there is additional information about the structure available in the 'The Open Protein Structure Annotation Network' (TOPSAN) wiki. As with BioLit, we are using Web Services to retrieve information contained within the TOPSAN wiki and display it on our protein structure pages. In addition to the retrieval of images and text, we also provide links to TOPSAN so that users can actively add to the content of the wiki. A screenshot of these two features-BioLit and TOPSAN-is shown in Figure 4. Pfam-A families classified as type 'family' and 'domain' with a lozenge shape, and families with type 'repeat' or 'motif' are represented by rectangles. The alignment co-ordinates are depitcted with a solid colour, and the envelope coordianates in a lighter shade of this colour. Where the profile HMM match for a domain or family is only of partial length, the curved end of the lozenge/rectangle is replaced by a jagged edge. Active-site residues are marked with a lollipop with a diamond-shaped head. An example tooltip showing the domain description, co-ordinates and source is shown for the fourth domain. Note the overlapping envelopes between fourth and fifth domains.
As described in the 2008 paper, in addition to the website and our RESTful interface, we also provide much of the data contained in Pfam via the distributed annotation system (DAS). DAS is a system for disseminating annotations and alignments of DNA or protein sequences through a simple, web-based protocol. Previously, we separated out our family annotations (both Pfam-A and Pfam-B) from other sequence annotations such as active-sites and transmembrane region predictions, such that we had two DAS features servers. Based on monitoring of our access logs and feedback from the community, we have combined the domain annotations for Pfam families and the additional sequence annotations into a single DAS features source. Furthermore, we have adapted the features response so that it conforms to the ontology standards set out for DAS feature servers (23).
Making our DAS features source ontology-compliant, along with others, allows DAS clients to readily group features of similar types, thereby allowing comparisons of data without the need to make bespoke parsers for each DAS source.
To allow users to run Pfam locally we distribute a software tool called 'pfam_scan'. The pfam_scan tool is a Perl wrapper around the HMMER package that allows protein sequences (in FASTA format) to be searched against Pfam's library of profile HMMs, with the results post-processed in a similar fashion to that performed internally within Pfam. The original software was written almost a decade ago, and over the years has been modified as problems have been identified (and addressed) and new features implemented. The script is Figure 3. New alignment confidence display. The colour of the residues reflects the alignment uncertainty, and is based on the posterior probability that is calculated by HMMER3. A green residue indicates a high posterior probability which means that the alignment of the amino acid to the match/insert state in the profile HMM is very likely to be correct. Where the posterior probablity is lower, and therefore the alignment certainty decreases, the colour becomes closer to red. This allows users quickly to identify regions of the alignment where some sequences are aligned with less certainty.
used widely by the Pfam user community. We have completely re-written the software to make it compatible with HMMER3. The new version of the pfam_scan script is available for download at ftp://ftp.sanger.ac. uk/pub/databases/Pfam/Tools/PfamScan.tar.gz.
To ensure consistency with Pfam, we wanted to be able to use exactly the same code for running searches on our website as our users would run when carrying out searches on their local machines. We also wanted the new code to be easier to maintain. In order to achieve these aims we have written the new code in a more modular fashion compared to the old version. This has, however, necessitated some changes in the dependencies of the software. In the past, pfam_scan was a standalone Perl script with no external dependencies other than standard Perl library modules and the HMMER programs. Rather than rewriting existing code, in the new version we have used a few modules that can be easily installed from CPAN. The modular nature of the code does mean that it can be more readily incorporated into other third party Perl scripts.
The blog not only allows us to explain our plans, it also allows our users to feedback comments which can open up into discussions. These discussions are recorded and are available for all to read, which is not the case when discussions happen directly with the Pfam team via e-mail.
We are aware that the changes we have made to Pfam will have a significant impact on the Pfam user community, especially the lack of compatibility between Pfam 24.0 and the releases based on older versions of HMMER; however, we have tried to provide adequate communication of these changes through a variety of media. After careful evaluation of HMMER3 and the impact its adoption will have, we strongly believe that the benefits far outweigh any disadvantages. For example, sequence searches against Pfam HMM libraries can now be routinely run on modern laptops, and large-scale genome or metagenome analyses are no longer daunting in terms of their computational requirements. The increased sensitivity that our models now have is pivotal for improving the understanding of protein biology, with previously distant twilight relationships between proteins now being detectable at a level closely rivalling that found through structural comparisons.
Pfam data can be downloaded directly from the WTSI FTP site (ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/pub/databases/Pfam), either as flat files or in the form of MySQL table dumps. Pfam websites are found at WTSI (http://pfam.sanger.ac .uk/), Stockholm Bioinformatics Center (http://pfam.sbc .su.se/) and Janelia Farm (http://pfam.janelia.org/).

Figure 1 .

1Sequence search results page. Results page for a single sequence search, showing at the top, the graphic of the domains matched by the query sequence along its length, with any active-site or metal-binding residues marked up if present. Underneath comes, firstly, the significant matches to Pfam-A families, then the insignificant matches to Pfam-A families, followed by the significant matches to Pfam-B families. At the bottom is the expanded match results with the #HMM line coloured such that residues identical to those in the query are coloured cyan and those that are similar in dark blue, and a #PP (posterior probability) line giving the posterior-probabilities at each point such that the #SEQ, query, line is colourcoded accordingly.

Figure 2 .

2New Pfam display of a protein domain architecture.

Table 1 .

1Clans which have been merged between Pfam release 23.0 and Pfam release 24.0Clan

Table 2 .


INTRODUCTION

Pfam is a comprehensive database of conserved protein families. This collection of nearly 12 000 families is used extensively throughout the biological sciences, by experimental biologists researching specific proteins, computational biologists who need to organise sequences, and evolutionary biologists considering the origin and evolution of proteins. Pfam is also widely used in the structural biology community for identifying interesting new targets for structure determination.
From its inception 12 years ago, Pfam has been designed to scale with the growth in the number of new protein sequences deposited. Scalability is achieved by having a set of seed alignments, with each alignment containing a representative set of sequences that are relatively stable between releases of the database. The seed alignments are used to build profile hidden Markov models (HMMs) that can be used to search any sequence database for homologues in a sensitive and accurate fashion. Those homologues that score above the curated inclusion thresholds are aligned against the profile to make a full alignment.
Our goal is to make Pfam a comprehensive and accurate classification of all known protein sequences. The 11 912 curated families are known as Pfam-A and are found in approximately three quarters of known proteins. In order to increase our coverage further, we augment the Pfam-A family collection with a set of automatically generated families called Pfam-B. Pfam-B is derived from the ADDA domain collection (1), which is described later.
Ten years ago, a family with more than 1000 sequences was considered to be large. Today, a growing number of families contain over 100 000 sequences. Depositions from large-scale metagenomic and other sequencing projects mean that we can expect the number of known sequences to grow into the billions, from the millions that we currently have. In order to deal with this explosion in the number of known sequences, we have made fundamental changes to the Pfam infrastructure. The most important of these has been the move to a new version of the profile HMM software, HMMER (http://hmmer .janelia.org/), which we use to build and search our models. Since 1998, Pfam (version 3.0 onwards) has utilised the HMMER2 package for building profile HMMs and searching them against sequences in the underlying sequence database. The new version of HMMER (version 3) is $100 times faster than the previous version and shows increased sensitivity.
In this article, we will describe the major changes that underlie the new version of Pfam (release 24.0) along with the major updates we have made to the families within the collection. We also describe changes made to both the database and to the web site and its associated services.

HMMER3

An alpha version of HMMER3 was released in early 2009. The HMMER3 project has four main aims: (i) to adopt log-odds likelihood scores summed over alignment uncertainty (Forward scores) in place of optimal alignment (Viterbi) scores; (ii) to report posterior probabilities of alignment confidence; (iii) to be able to accurately and quickly calculate expectation values (E-values) for Forward scores (a previously unsolved problem); and (iv) to accelerate previous profile HMM performance by two orders of magnitude and achieve an overall speed competitive with BLAST (2). These goals have been met and the software package is now undergoing testing pending a stable 3.0 release. The outcome of aims (i) and (iii) make HMMER3 more sensitive. The increase in speed arises from a combination of approaches, including the use of vector-parallel SIMD (single instruction multiple data) instructions (SSE2 on Intel-compatible platforms; Altivec/VMX on PowerPC platforms); a new acceleration heuristic; and a 'sparse rescaling' method enabling the Forward and Backward HMM algorithms to be implemented in much faster calculations based on scaled probabilities rather than standard implementation in log probabilities (all to be described more fully in a future paper). The Cambridge Pfam team (especially RDF) has worked closely with the Janelia Farm HMMER team (especially SRE) on testing the alpha and beta versions of HMMER3 to ensure that it is stable enough to adopt in Pfam database-production pipelines. For the production of Pfam 24.0, HMMER3 beta 2 version was used.
A limitation of HMMER3 is that it currently computes only local alignments. HMMER2 was capable of calculating either local or glocal (complete model matching one or more times to subsequences of the target sequence) alignments. Until 2002, each family in Pfam was represented by a single profile HMM, where the curator of the family chose whether the model should be in local or glocal mode. From 2002, both local and glocal mode models were constructed from the same seed alignment. The membership of the family and those sequences that made it into the full alignment of a family were based on the union of the significant matches to the glocal and the local models. Under HMMER3, we again construct only a single model from the seed alignment, and that model is in local alignment mode. The parameterisation of HMMER3 local alignment models is sufficiently improved that a single HMMER3 local alignment model generally outperforms the union of HMMER2 local and glocal models. Still, glocal alignment is desirable, because it can sometimes increase sensitivity; when E-value statistics of glocal Forward scores are sufficiently well understood and can be calculated rapidly, a glocal alignment mode option will be restored in HMMER3.
The change to HMMER3 comes at an opportune moment, as the computational burden of making a Pfam release was increasing significantly due to a combination of searching two models per family (local and glocal), the increasing size of sequence databases and the increasing number of Pfam families.
As an example of HMMER3's speed, it now typically takes <5 min to search a profile HMM against the latest version of pfamseq (9.4-million sequences), compared with the $535 min to search the corresponding model using HMMER2 (based on searches with a single Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU, 3.00 GHz). Pfam release 23.0 took $60 CPU years to calculate (searching and post-processing of data), with the vast majority of this time spent in profile HMM searches with HMMER2. Pfam 24.0 took $10 CPU years, despite the near doubling of the sequence database since Pfam 23.0 and the adoption of a more computationally demanding procedure for calculating the trees for each family (described later).

Thresholds and compatibility

The new scoring system of HMMER3 means that all of our families based on HMMER2 needed to have their gathering thresholds re-defining. The gathering threshold is the bit score threshold that a sequence must match or exceed in order for it to be deemed significant and therefore belonging to that family. In Pfam, we manually define our thresholds such that no known false positives are permitted in any family. However, although it is possible to generate HMMER2 style profile HMMs from a HMMER3 profile HMM, the thresholds are not backward compatible. Therefore, it is important to emphasise that Pfam 24.0, based on HMMER3, is not backward compatible with HMMER2. Nevertheless, we believe that the significant increase in performance far outweighs this compatibility issue.

Envelope and alignment domain boundaries

By default, HMMER3 reports two sets of domain coordinates for each profile HMM match. The envelope co-ordinates delineate the region on the sequence where the match has been probabilistically determined to lie, whereas the alignment co-ordinates delineate the region over which HMMER is confident that the alignment of the sequence to the profile HMM is correct. In the Pfam-A full alignments we report only a single set of co-ordinates, the envelope co-ordinates, as these represent the sequencesegment that is aligned to the profile HMM. When an envelope exists, this is represented as insert (lower case) characters at the beginning and/or end of the alignment. On the whole, the envelopes are small extensions (<10 amino acids, mean 2.7 with SD of 7.9 at the N-terminus, and mean of 3.2 and SD of 9.1 at the C-terminus) at either end of the alignment co-ordinates. There are some cases, however, where the envelope start and end range can be significantly longer than the alignment co-ordinate range.
In Pfam, we do not allow overlaps between the alignment co-ordinates of different Pfam-A domains.

FAMILY UPDATES


Numbers of new families

Since the last publication describing Pfam in 2008 (release 22.0), we have added 2871 Pfam-A families and deleted 236. Pfam 24.0 is based on UniProt version 15.6. We also provide our match-data against NCBI GenPept (version 172) and a collection of metagenomic samples.
Pfam 24.0 represents a 24% increase in the total number of families, relative to Pfam 23.0. Most of these new families have come from one of two sources: (i) a family seeded by a structure deposited in the Protein Data Bank-wwPDB (3)-that Pfam 23.0 did not cover, and (ii) Pfam-B families that we have used as a starting point for building Pfam-A, focusing particularly on Pfam-B clusters without a corresponding annotated family in InterPro (4). In addition to these, many families have been contributed via suggestions from the community.

Iteration of families in 23.0

As well as adding new families, we have also revised all 8339 families that were not part of a Pfam clan, where a clan is a collection of Pfam families which we believe to have a common evolutionarily ancestor (5). Pfam has existed since the late 1990s and many of the families added over this 12-year-period have had few, if any, updates since they were first deposited. Consequently, the seed alignments that were used to construct the profile HMMs were built from sequence databases that did not contain the diverse range of species that they do today. As the seed alignment is intended to contain representative members of a protein family, we have tried to improve our seed alignments for each family, through a process we refer to as iteration. This process starts with the full alignment for a family and attempts to make a new non-redundant seed alignment from it. During this process, any fragment matches are removed as are other sequences containing insertions and deletions that are likely to be incorrect. The alignment is typically made non-redundant so that no pair of sequences shares more than 80% sequence identity. The new profile HMM generated from this seed alignment is searched against the sequence database, and during this process, a proportion of families modified in this way should have captured new and more distant homologues. Having iterated every family not in a Pfam clan, 50% of these were found to have expanded with additional homologues, and their profile HMMs now have the more divergent sequence amino acid substitutions, insertions and deletions modelled in them. We intend to iterate families that belong to clans in the future.
Although in most cases the improvements to any one family were modest, some families gained many hundreds of new members. For example, the Rhodanese domain (Pfam accession PF00581) gained 1483 new sequences during iteration. Expansion also indicated hitherto unseen inter-family relationships, such that families could be merged together into a single entity. An example of one such merge is the uncharacterised family DUF30 (Pfam accession PF01727), which was found to be closely related to Peptidase_S7 (Pfam accession PF00949) and was therefore merged into that family.

INCREASE IN COVERAGE

One of the goals of Pfam is to be as comprehensive as we can be, so that as many sequences as possible fall into one of our families. Therefore, we closely monitor both the sequence coverage of Pfam (the proportion of sequences with at least one match to a Pfam-A) and the residue coverage (the proportion of residues that are matched by Pfam-A), particularly between one release and the next. Although these headline numbers regarding coverage are accurate, they do not represent a truly fair comparison between the current and previous releases. The dramatic increase in the number of sequences in the sequence database between Pfam 23.0 and 24.0 serves to mask an equally dramatic increase in coverage.
To make the comparison fairer, we can base it on the intersection between the two releases of Pfam in terms of families and sequences. Thus, if we consider only those sequences that are common to both Pfam 23.0 and Pfam 24.0, and only the families that are present in both 23.0 and 24.0, we observe an increase of 0.85 percentage points in sequence coverage and an increase of 1 percentage point in residue coverage. These increases are due to a combination of two factors: (i) improvements to our existing families achieved through the iteration process, and (ii) the increased sensitivity of HMMER3, as compared to HMMER2. Of the families that were present in both releases 23.0 and 24.0, 4782 families gained members, 2214 families did not change in size and 3104 families decreased in size. Of those 3104 families that decreased in size, only 974 lost more than 10 member sequences.
Close analysis of the families that have lost sequences reveals that the types of losses fall into three broad categories. The first is losses due simply to a difference in the distribution of sequences between families belonging to the same clan. For example, the ig (Pfam accession PF00047) and I-set (Pfam accession PF07679) families both belong to the Ig clan (Pfam clan accession CL0011); whilst the ig domain has lost 2365 sequences, the V-set has gained 1067 sequences, and with the other clan members gaining small numbers this gives comparable numbers of sequences matched amongst the clan members between the two releases.
The second category is losses largely confined to viralspecific families, such as HCV_NS1 (Pfam accession PF01560) and RVT_connect (Pfam accession PF06815), which have both lost thousands of members. This has been caused by sequence fragments, typically of <15 amino acids in length, being detected at the extreme N-and/or C-termini of families by HMMER2 but not by HMMER3. Many viral families will be affected in this way as UniProt contains many fragments of viral proteins, especially of polyproteins.
The third category results from a loss of sensitivity in a few, very specific HMMER3 models compared to their HMMER2 counterparts. These models fall into two subcategories: (i) very short repeats, e.g. Hexapep (Pfam accession PF00132) and Ank (Pfam accession PF00023), and (ii) short, very divergent families, e.g. zf-C2H2 (Pfam accession PF00096) and HATPase_c (Pfam accession PF02518). All of the families that fall into this third category are symptomatic of the same feature, the match is not sufficiently long enough for the signal to be distinguishable from the noise. This is quite easy to understand for the very short repeats (subcategory (i) above). Those families in subcategory (ii) are a little harder to explain. All of these families were 'tuned' effectively to HMMER2's glocal alignment (a complete domain with respect to the query model, local in the target sequence). Such families have typically short models containing <100 consensus residues with lots of extremely diverse sequences in the alignment (low average sequence identity). This gives rise to the situation where the average score per homologous position is low across a short model such that true homologues are just barely resolvable from the noise even when all consensus residues are aligned. In local alignments (HMMER3's default and only mode), the probability theory assesses an extra bit score penalty of log_2 {2/[M(M + 1)]} (for the extra freedom of finding start/end positions anywhere in a model of consensus length M) which works out to $ À12 bits for a model of M = 100. If the true homologues were resolvable from noise by <12 bits by glocal alignment, then, in local alignments they might well become indistinguishable from the noise. As the Pfam curated gathering thresholds are set such that no known false positives are included in the family we are excluding these sequences that are in the top of the noise.
We intend to address the issuses of these poorly performing families with respect to HMMER2, by building multiple HMMs to represent the family, with each HMM being built from a seed alignment containing more closely related homologues. The new families will be grouped into a clan to represent the divergent family. Addressing this issue will be a priority of the curation process between Pfam 24.0 and 25.0.

Improved sensitivity

So, what has the improved sensitivity of HMMER3 achieved? We have so far focused on sequence coverage and have said less about residue coverage. The increase in residue coverage by nearly 2 percentage points is quite remarkable. In the last 5 years, our residue coverage between releases has fluctuated by only fractions of 1 percentage point. The current change clearly indicates that although we are not finding substantially more matches on sequences that do not already match a Pfam-A family, we are matching more residues on sequences where we do already have a Pfam-A match.
The increase in residue coverage comes from one or both of two sources, namely longer length matches and matches to additional domains on a sequence. Although the improvements to the HMMER3 local model have meant that local matches are longer, prior to release 24.0 we typically took glocal matches in preference to local ones. Our analysis of the unique domain architectures, where a domain architecture is defined as a particular combination of Pfam-A families, shows that there has been a 67% increase (from 48 634 to 72 629) in the number of distinct architectures between Pfam 23.0 and Pfam 24.0. Of the 4.9-million sequences common to the sequence databases of releases 23.0 and 24.0, 11.4% of them have changed domain architecture.
Another way in which the increased sensitivity has affected Pfam is that we have detected many more similarities between families due to sequence regions significantly matching more than one Pfam HMM. These relationships were predominantly identified after building HMMER3 models for all of the Pfam seed alignments, and searching them against the same sequence database on which Pfam 23.0 was built. These search results showed that the increased sensitivity of HMMER3 had expanded many of our families, but that $80 000 sequences now had overlapping matches to more than one Pfam family. Since we do not allow overlaps between alignment co-ordinates, each of these overlaps had to be resolved.
There are a number of reasons why overlaps might arise: (i) families overlap by only a few end residues, so we will trim the domain boundaries such that the two families no longer overlap, (ii) the sequence(s) that have the overlap are false positives in one or other of the families, so here we raise the threshold in that family such that the sequence is excluded, and this helps to maintain the high quality of the Pfam data, and (iii) two or more families may share full-length matches, so, depending on the degree of similarity between them, these families may be merged into one or be grouped together into a clan.
Many of the overlaps generated by HMMER3 were due to reason (iii). We always preferentially merge families if we can build a single HMM model that detects both sets of sequences. This explains why the number of deleted families at Pfam 24.0 was so high (236 families were deleted). For example, DUF223 (Pfam accession PF03027), a family of moth juvenile hormone binding proteins and Drosophila proteins of unknown function has been merged into JHBP (Pfam accession PF06585) which is a family of insect specific haemolymph juvenile hormone binding proteins. However, more often than not, the two families will be too divergent to make a single HMM, but the overlaps have allowed us to identify and/or confirm relationships between them for which we previously had insufficient evidence. Using the HMMER3 overlap data together with profile comparison data from PRC (6) and SCOOP (7), and structural data, we were able to assign many families to existing clans, and since Pfam 23.0 we have created 120 new clans. We have also been able to merge some existing clans (listed in Table 1), showing that we are bringing together groups of families previously thought to belong to different structural superfamilies.
In Pfam release 24.0, 3131 out of 11 912 families (26.3%) belong to a clan, compared with 2009 out of 10 340 families (19.4%) in Pfam release 23.0. Notably, the families that typically belong to clans correspond to the larger families in Pfam, so that over 57.3% (up by 11.9% since Pfam 23.0) of our sequence annotations come from families falling within the clan hierarchical classification.

Proteome coverages

While we have focused on the highs and lows in terms of performance, there is an overall trend towards an increase in coverage. A more fine grained way of assessing the difference in coverage between Pfam 23.0 and Pfam 24.0 is to take the proteomes from completed genomes, present in both releases, and look at the differences in sequence and residue coverage of a range of these individually to see how coverage has changed (Table 2). Generally, we observe an increase that is comparable or higher to the gross coverage gains. When a similar analysis was performed in 2000 (8), the eukaryotic genomes lagged behind bacterial genomes in both sequence and residue coverage. For many of the model organims such as human and yeast, the sequence coverage is more on a par with bacterial sequence coverage. The increase in coverage is down to many factors that include better gene builds, more eukaryotic homologues in the sequence database and improved models in Pfam. Instances where the coverage has fallen between the two releases can often be attributed to new assemblies (e.g. Danio rerio) and the lag time for that new data to percolate through to the relevant databases.

Improved Pfam-B coverage

To aid our goal of comprehensively covering the whole of sequence space, we generate a set of automated families in addition to our curated Pfam-A families. The automated families are called Pfam-B families and are built from homologous sequence clusters. Each Pfam-B is represented by a single alignment and has no associated profile HMM or accompanying annotation. In previous releases of Pfam, Pfam-B families were generated by taking clusters derived from MSP-crunch and latterly PRODOM (9) clusters, and removing regions covered by Pfam-A families to leave a set of Pfam-B clusters (10). The PRODOM database is updated infrequently which means that newly deposited sequences may not be incorporated into a PRODOM cluster for a long time. Thus if, in the meantime, Pfam updates to a more recent sequence database, the sequence coverage of Pfam contributed by Pfam-B will be much lower than it might be. The ADDA algorithm has been used from Pfam release 23.0 onwards, to generate the Pfam-B families.
ADDA is a method for automatically predicting protein sequence domains from protein sequence alignments alone. Briefly, the ADDA algorithm takes a set of nonredundant sequences (11,12) and aligns them all-versus-all using BLAST (2). Sequences are then partitioned into domains by optimising an objective function that penalises domains that (i) split alignments or (ii) overlap with alignments only partially. The resultant domains are grouped into clusters using pairwise profile-profile comparisons. The whole procedure is calibrated using SCOP (13) domains as a gold-standard.
The current ADDA core is based on a non-redundant sequence data set from a 2007 snapshot of Uniprot with 3 378 785 sequences, 6 181 472 domains and 270 191 nonsingleton families. The ADDA core is projected onto the latest sequence data set using BLAT (14) with a 40% sequence identity cut-off. After mapping, ADDA assigns 8 119 847 domains to 11 626 194 sequences in 303 153 nonsingleton families. On average, 83% (median: 97%) of amino acid residues in protein sequences are covered by domains. Updating the ADDA core is currently a 'work in progress'. For Pfam-B generation, we take clusters of multiple sequence alignments and subtract the regions covered by Pfam-A, as described previously in detail in ref. (10). We use MAFFT to create multiple sequence alignments from the sequence co-ordinates of each ADDA cluster, for clusters that contain between 2 and 1000 sequences and comprise more than 40 amino acids. This process sheds only $2500 ADDA clusters, most of which are already covered by Pfam-A regions. In Pfam 24.0, from the 300 422 ADDA clusters that fulfil this criterion, we have built 142 303 Pfam-B families.
In Pfam release 23.0, where ADDA was used for the first time, the sequence coverage contributed by Pfam-B increased substantially from what would have been 3.9% with PRODOM, to 11.8%. Due to the increased coverage provided by Pfam-A in release 24.0, the fact that many new families have been built starting from the largest Pfam-Bs in Pfam 23.0 and that the ADDA core is becoming more out of date, this coverage has dropped, but still provides 5.7% additional sequence coverage, and contributes 5.8% additional residue coverage. We expect future releases of Pfam to be correlated with updates to the ADDA core, and expect the coverage provided by Pfam-B to rise once more. Despite the lower than ideal coverage contribution provided from Pfam-B, the combined coverage provided by Pfam-A and Pfam-B is 80.9% for sequence coverage and 58.8% for residue coverage.

STREAMLINING OF THE PFAM PIPELINE

As part of switching to HMMER3, we have identified additional bottlenecks in the database production pipeline in terms of potential scalability and/or computational time. Our aim has been to perform the same quality control checks and post-processing on a family regardless of size (i.e. scale from 2 to 100 000 sequences), while ideally reducing the computational burden imposed by the production pipeline.

Neighbour-joining trees using FastTree

Prior to Pfam release 24.0, the 'QuickTree' software (15) was used to produce UPGMA-based phylogenetic trees for ordering the sequences contained in the full and seed alignments for each Pfam family. From release 23.0 onwards we started to provide the more accurate, but computationally more intensive, neighbour-joining (NJ) tree for families with <20 000 members. We were, however, unable to provide bootstrap values for the NJ trees as these were too time consuming to compute. Furthermore, for our larger families, producing the faster and computationally cheaper UPGMA tree using QuickTree could take up to 3 days, and was also proving to be memory intensive.
From release 24.0 we have moved to using the 'FastTree' software (16) to produce NJ trees with

Family comparisons

To detect relationships between families we perform profile-profile comparisons between all profile HMMs.
In the past we used the profile comparison software 'PRC' (6); however, the profile-profile comparison software 'HHsearch' (17) is $10 times faster, with both pieces of software producing comparable results. Therefore, we have switched to using the faster HHsearch software. Profile-profile comparison results are shown on the family summary page, alongside results from SCOOP family comparisons. Profile-profile comparison results are also used to construct the clan relationship images (e.g. http://pfam.sanger.ac. uk/clan?acc=CL0012), where the relationship between families is depicted as a graph (families are nodes, relationships are edges between the nodes).

Data version control

All Pfam-A family and clan data files are now under version control using Subversion (SVN -http://subversion.tigris.org). We have modified our pipelines to tightly couple commits of changes to quality-control checks and population of the underlying MySQL database. We will shortly be making our SVN repository externally accessible using the HTTPS protocol. Readaccess to the repository will be granted to all, thereby allowing users access to pre-released versions of our data. Furthermore, this system will open up the opportunity for trained collaborators outside the Pfam consortium to add and modify families and clans using our software. We expect this system to be fully operational by the beginning of 2010.

Changes to the underlying MySQL database

The changes caused by migration to using HMMER3 have necessitated numerous alterations to the database schema. We have also moved from using the MyISAM table-engine (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MyISAM) to using InnoDB (http://www.innodb.com). Although it is not appropriate to discuss the pros and cons of different table-engines here, one of the fundamental differences between the two is that InnoDB supports foreign key relationships, i.e. there is declarative referential integrity. In addition to improving data quality-control, InnoDB also makes the schema (containing 63 tables) easier to understand and to write queries against.

NEW WEBSITE FEATURES


Interactive sequence searches

One of the primary user entry-points into the website is via a sequence search. We have already described the speed improvement achieved with HMMER3 and this improvement means that single sequence searches are now interactive. A search of a sequence of 500 amino acids takes <0.5 s against the current HMM library, using hmmscan (hmmscan is the HMMER3 program that replaces the hmmpfam program in HMMER2). Given the speed of hmmscan in HMMER3, we have decided to use an HMM-based approach for detecting matches to Pfam-Bs. In the past, Pfam-B matches were detected in query sequences by a BLAST search of the query against a fasta file containing all of the Pfam-B regions. However, this approach often gave rise to many partial Pfam-B matches to the query sequence, making these matches less useful. To improve the sensitivity and specificity of Pfam-B searches and to ensure that the search results return interactively, we have taken the 20 000 largest Pfam-Bs (Pfam-B accessions PB000001 to PB020000) and built HMMs from the Pfam-B multiple sequence aligments. The query sequence is searched against the Pfam-B HMMs with a default E-value cutoff of 0.001. When multi-threaded versions of HMMER3 become available, we anticipate expanding the Pfam-B HMM library to include all Pfam-Bs.
The sequence search results table which displays the matches to Pfam is much the same as before with the exception that we now include both the envelope and the alignment co-ordinates as well as information about whether the matched family belongs to a clan. As the user moves their mouse pointer over the 'significant hits' table the domain corresponding to that row is highlighted in the domain architecture graphic by a grey bar. The biggest change to the content of the results page comes when the user chooses to show the alignment between the query sequence and the HMM (see Figure 1). The query sequence is colour-coded according to the posteriorprobability, given in the #PP line. The HMM is now colour-coded according to the amino acid similarity between the most probable sequence, which is shown in the #HMM line, and the query sequence, #SEQ. Identical residues are coloured cyan, while similar residues are coloured dark blue.

Additional family page features

Displaying the domain architecture of proteins. We have adapted the way that protein domains are graphically represented on a sequence such that we are now able to depict both the envelope and the alignment co-ordinates. As before, Pfam-A families classified as type 'repeat' or 'motif' are represented by rectangles and families with type 'family' and 'domain' with a lozenge shape. Where the profile HMM match for a domain or family is only of partial length, the curved end of the lozenge/rectangle is replaced by a jagged edge, as depicted in Figure 2. Envelope regions are shown as a lighter shade of the colour used to colour the alignment region. As most envelope regions are small and we draw most of our graphics at 1 or 2 amino acids per pixel, for the majority of cases the envelope regions are barely visible. To provide more information to our users, we have expanded the information contained in the 'tool tips', to include both the domain and the envelope co-ordinates as well as the short descriptor of the family. In addition to indicating known and predicted active-site residues found in UniProt (18) and Pfam (19), which are represented as lollipops with a diamond-shaped head, we now also indicate the metal-binding residues defined in UniProt, represented as lollipops with a square-shaped head.
We have re-factored the mechanisms by which the domain architectures of sequences are generated.
Previously, each of the graphics would be generated as a temporary image that was served by a separate request to the web server. At busy times, we were generating thousands of temporary images per minute and serving them. To avoid the load of generating and serving the domain architecture images on the server, we now use a javascript library that we have written to render the images within the client browser.
Alignment confidence display. Another feature of HMMER3 is that as the searches are now based on the Forward algorithm, there is a probabilistic inference of alignment uncertainty. This is recorded as a posterior probability for each amino acid that is matched to a profile HMM. We have taken these posterior probabilities and converted the data into a heat map-style representation of the alignment. When the alignment of an amino acid to a match state in the profile HMM is estimated to be correct, then this amino acid is shown in upper case with its background colour shown in green. As the alignment certainty diminishes, the colour becomes closer to red. The same colouring scheme is employed for inserts, with confidently assigned inserts being coloured green. At the boundaries between inserts and matches, there tends to be less certainty about the accuracy of the alignment and hence residues here are coloured in tones closer to red. Posterior probabilities are calculated when a sequence is aligned to the profile HMM, therefore this feature is only available for our full alignments (see Figure 3) and not for our seed alignments.

HMM-logos.

For each Pfam-A family we now include a graphical representation of the HMM, using the 'logomatm' software (20). These HMM logos are found on a separate tab for each family and are embedded in a scrollable window.
Family protein sets. One of our most frequent userrequests of late has been the ability to download the set of UniProt sequences that belong to a particular family as a FASTA file. This has now been added as a download option, with the title 'full-length sequences', within the alignments section of the family web pages.

TreeFam links

TreeFam is a database of phylogenetic trees of eukaryotic genes that contains orthologue and paralogue assignments in addition to information regarding the evolutionary history of various gene families (21). We now provide reciprocal links to TreeFam from the Protein pages on the website as there is not a one-to-one relationship between Pfam-A entries and TreeFam entries. To further complicate the linking, TreeFam is based on a collection of protein sequences drawn from several different databases. To set-up the links to TreeFam, we cross reference the MD5 checksums of the protein sequences contained in Pfam with those found in TreeFam families. When a link is available, we display the TreeFam phylogenetic tree within our protein page.

Improvements to the scientific annotations

The annotation provided in Pfam for each family is a brief synopsis of the function of the family. Although we endeavour to keep these summaries up-to-date, it is becoming an ever increasingly difficult task as the numbers of families and the sequences they contain grow.
Identifying functional data from papers is timeconsuming, as more often than not, protein sequenceidentifiers are rarely used in any standard format. However, for protein structures, the PDB represents the single repository for such data, and consequently the PDB identifiers are a common standard format. Text-mining of full text articles for terms such as these protein-identifiers is becoming a fruitful way of identifying articles of interest. The new website will be utilising the Web services provide by BioLit (22) which allows access to metadata describing the semantic content of all open access, peer-reviewed articles (in PubMed Central) based on a PDB identifier. Whenever an article is found to contain a PDB identifier, we will use the Web services to retrieve the abstract, figures and figure legends from that article and make them available on our pages. Unfortunately, not all articles are published in open access journals, so this feature will not appear on every structure page.
The efforts from the field of structural genomics are depositing more and more structures with no associated publication. For many structural genomics targets there is additional information about the structure available in the 'The Open Protein Structure Annotation Network' (TOPSAN) wiki. As with BioLit, we are using Web Services to retrieve information contained within the TOPSAN wiki and display it on our protein structure pages. In addition to the retrieval of images and text, we also provide links to TOPSAN so that users can actively add to the content of the wiki. A screenshot of these two features-BioLit and TOPSAN-is shown in Figure 4. Pfam-A families classified as type 'family' and 'domain' with a lozenge shape, and families with type 'repeat' or 'motif' are represented by rectangles. The alignment co-ordinates are depitcted with a solid colour, and the envelope coordianates in a lighter shade of this colour. Where the profile HMM match for a domain or family is only of partial length, the curved end of the lozenge/rectangle is replaced by a jagged edge. Active-site residues are marked with a lollipop with a diamond-shaped head. An example tooltip showing the domain description, co-ordinates and source is shown for the fourth domain. Note the overlapping envelopes between fourth and fifth domains.

DAS ontology compliance

As described in the 2008 paper, in addition to the website and our RESTful interface, we also provide much of the data contained in Pfam via the distributed annotation system (DAS). DAS is a system for disseminating annotations and alignments of DNA or protein sequences through a simple, web-based protocol. Previously, we separated out our family annotations (both Pfam-A and Pfam-B) from other sequence annotations such as active-sites and transmembrane region predictions, such that we had two DAS features servers. Based on monitoring of our access logs and feedback from the community, we have combined the domain annotations for Pfam families and the additional sequence annotations into a single DAS features source. Furthermore, we have adapted the features response so that it conforms to the ontology standards set out for DAS feature servers (23).
Making our DAS features source ontology-compliant, along with others, allows DAS clients to readily group features of similar types, thereby allowing comparisons of data without the need to make bespoke parsers for each DAS source.

LOCAL PFAM SEARCHES WITH PFAM_SCAN

To allow users to run Pfam locally we distribute a software tool called 'pfam_scan'. The pfam_scan tool is a Perl wrapper around the HMMER package that allows protein sequences (in FASTA format) to be searched against Pfam's library of profile HMMs, with the results post-processed in a similar fashion to that performed internally within Pfam. The original software was written almost a decade ago, and over the years has been modified as problems have been identified (and addressed) and new features implemented. The script is Figure 3. New alignment confidence display. The colour of the residues reflects the alignment uncertainty, and is based on the posterior probability that is calculated by HMMER3. A green residue indicates a high posterior probability which means that the alignment of the amino acid to the match/insert state in the profile HMM is very likely to be correct. Where the posterior probablity is lower, and therefore the alignment certainty decreases, the colour becomes closer to red. This allows users quickly to identify regions of the alignment where some sequences are aligned with less certainty.
used widely by the Pfam user community. We have completely re-written the software to make it compatible with HMMER3. The new version of the pfam_scan script is available for download at ftp://ftp.sanger.ac. uk/pub/databases/Pfam/Tools/PfamScan.tar.gz.
To ensure consistency with Pfam, we wanted to be able to use exactly the same code for running searches on our website as our users would run when carrying out searches on their local machines. We also wanted the new code to be easier to maintain. In order to achieve these aims we have written the new code in a more modular fashion compared to the old version. This has, however, necessitated some changes in the dependencies of the software. In the past, pfam_scan was a standalone Perl script with no external dependencies other than standard Perl library modules and the HMMER programs. Rather than rewriting existing code, in the new version we have used a few modules that can be easily installed from CPAN. The modular nature of the code does mean that it can be more readily incorporated into other third party Perl scripts.
The blog not only allows us to explain our plans, it also allows our users to feedback comments which can open up into discussions. These discussions are recorded and are available for all to read, which is not the case when discussions happen directly with the Pfam team via e-mail.

SUMMARY

We are aware that the changes we have made to Pfam will have a significant impact on the Pfam user community, especially the lack of compatibility between Pfam 24.0 and the releases based on older versions of HMMER; however, we have tried to provide adequate communication of these changes through a variety of media. After careful evaluation of HMMER3 and the impact its adoption will have, we strongly believe that the benefits far outweigh any disadvantages. For example, sequence searches against Pfam HMM libraries can now be routinely run on modern laptops, and large-scale genome or metagenome analyses are no longer daunting in terms of their computational requirements. The increased sensitivity that our models now have is pivotal for improving the understanding of protein biology, with previously distant twilight relationships between proteins now being detectable at a level closely rivalling that found through structural comparisons.

AVAILABILITY

Pfam data can be downloaded directly from the WTSI FTP site (ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/pub/databases/Pfam), either as flat files or in the form of MySQL table dumps. Pfam websites are found at WTSI (http://pfam.sanger.ac .uk/), Stockholm Bioinformatics Center (http://pfam.sbc .su.se/) and Janelia Farm (http://pfam.janelia.org/).
Sequence coverage has increased by 1.41 percentage points from Pfam 23.0 to a coverage of 75.15% in Pfam 24.0. Residue coverage has increased by a similar margin, from 51.22% in Pfam 23.0 to 53.18% in Pfam 24.0, a gain of 1.96 percentage points.

Figure 1 .

1Sequence search results page. Results page for a single sequence search, showing at the top, the graphic of the domains matched by the query sequence along its length, with any active-site or metal-binding residues marked up if present. Underneath comes, firstly, the significant matches to Pfam-A families, then the insignificant matches to Pfam-A families, followed by the significant matches to Pfam-B families. At the bottom is the expanded match results with the #HMM line coloured such that residues identical to those in the query are coloured cyan and those that are similar in dark blue, and a #PP (posterior probability) line giving the posterior-probabilities at each point such that the #SEQ, query, line is colourcoded accordingly.

Figure 2 .

2New Pfam display of a protein domain architecture.

Table 1 .

1Clans which have been merged between Pfam release 23.0 and Pfam release 24.0Clan

Table 2 .

2Residue and sequence coverage of a number of complete proteomes in Pfam 24.0, with the percentage points change between Pfam releases 23.0 and 24.0 given in brackets. Archaeal species are coloured pale red, bacterial orange and eukaryotic species purpleSpecies
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSWe are grateful for the infrastructure support provided by the Systems, Web and Database administration teams at Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute (WTSI), especially Guy Coates and Andy Bryant. Finally, we would to like to thank all of the users of Pfam who have submitted new families and/or annotation updates for existing entries.Speed. The new version of the pfam_scan script runs considerably faster than the old version for any given search. We have achieved this speed-up through both the use of HMMER3 (which gives an $100-fold increase in searchspeeds over HMMER2) and by optimising the efficiency of the Perl wrapping code. Our benchmarks show that for a typical sequence search of 300 amino acids, against a library of $11 000 profile HMMs, the new pfam_scan code adds only $100-200 ms to the search time over and above the 1 s hmmscan run-time (benchmarks were performed on a single 2.4 GHz AMD Opteron processor). The new output contains both the envelope and the alignment co-ordinates (see above for definitions) from HMMER3, and each Pfam-A match now includes its clan membership (if any), and its significance, which will be either 1 or 0 depending on whether the match scores higher than the Pfam gathering threshold, or not. (iii) We have also added an option to write the results in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) format. JSON is a compact, text-based data format which is most commonly used in the context of the web and javascript applications. As it is a compact and portable format, JSON can also be useful as a lightweight XML alternative.THE XFAM BLOGWith so many changes happening to Pfam between releases 23.0 and 24.0, and because many other databases and software tools rely on Pfam annotations and tools, we needed to communicate our changes and progress to the Pfam community. An extremely effective way of doing this is through the use of a blog. In January 2009, we created the Xfam blog (http://xfam.wordpress. com/), which we share with the Rfam project(24).  Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
ADDA: a domain database with global coverage of the protein universe. A Heger, C A Wilton, A Sivakumar, L Holm, Nucleic Acids Res. 33Heger,A., Wilton,C.A., Sivakumar,A. and Holm,L. (2005) ADDA: a domain database with global coverage of the protein universe. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D188-D191.
Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. S F Altschul, T L Madden, A A Schaffer, J Zhang, Z Zhang, W Miller, D J Lipman, Nucleic Acids Res. 25Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z., Miller,W. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI- BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res., 25, 3389-3402.
Remediation of the protein data bank archive. K Henrick, Z Feng, W F Bluhm, D Dimitropoulos, J F Doreleijers, S Dutta, J L Flippen-Anderson, J Ionides, C Kamada, E Krissinel, Nucleic Acids Res. 36Henrick,K., Feng,Z., Bluhm,W.F., Dimitropoulos,D., Doreleijers,J.F., Dutta,S., Flippen-Anderson,J.L., Ionides,J., Kamada,C., Krissinel,E. et al. (2008) Remediation of the protein data bank archive. Nucleic Acids Res., 36, D426-D433.
InterPro: the integrative protein signature database. S Hunter, R Apweiler, T K Attwood, A Bairoch, A Bateman, D Binns, P Bork, U Das, L Daugherty, L Duquenne, Nucleic Acids Res. 37Hunter,S., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Bateman,A., Binns,D., Bork,P., Das,U., Daugherty,L., Duquenne,L. et al. (2009) InterPro: the integrative protein signature database. Nucleic Acids Res., 37, D211-D215.
Pfam: clans, web tools and services. R D Finn, J Mistry, B Schuster-Bockler, S Griffiths-Jones, V Hollich, T Lassmann, S Moxon, M Marshall, A Khanna, R Durbin, Nucleic Acids Res. 34Finn,R.D., Mistry,J., Schuster-Bockler,B., Griffiths-Jones,S., Hollich,V., Lassmann,T., Moxon,S., Marshall,M., Khanna,A., Durbin,R. et al. (2006) Pfam: clans, web tools and services. Nucleic Acids Res., 34, D247-D251.
Profile Comparer: a program for scoring and aligning profile hidden Markov models. M Madera, Bioinformatics. 24Madera,M. (2008) Profile Comparer: a program for scoring and aligning profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics, 24, 2630-2631.
SCOOP: a simple method for identification of novel protein superfamily relationships. A Bateman, R D Finn, Bioinformatics. 23Bateman,A. and Finn,R.D. (2007) SCOOP: a simple method for identification of novel protein superfamily relationships. Bioinformatics, 23, 809-814.
Pfam: a domain-centric method for analyzing proteins and proteomes. J Mistry, R Finn, Methods Mol. Biol. 396Mistry,J. and Finn,R. (2007) Pfam: a domain-centric method for analyzing proteins and proteomes. Methods Mol. Biol., 396, 43-58.
ProDom and ProDom-CG: tools for protein domain analysis and whole genome comparisons. F Corpet, F Servant, J Gouzy, D Kahn, Nucleic Acids Res. 28Corpet,F., Servant,F., Gouzy,J. and Kahn,D. (2000) ProDom and ProDom-CG: tools for protein domain analysis and whole genome comparisons. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 267-269.
The Pfam protein families database. A Bateman, E Birney, R Durbin, S R Eddy, K L Howe, E L L Sonnhammer, Nucleic Acids Res. 28Bateman,A., Birney,E., Durbin,R., Eddy,S.R., Howe,K.L. and Sonnhammer,E.L.L. (2000) The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 263-266.
PairsDB atlas of protein sequence space. A Heger, E Korpelainen, T Hupponen, K Mattila, V Ollikainen, L Holm, Nucleic Acids Res. 36Heger,A., Korpelainen,E., Hupponen,T., Mattila,K., Ollikainen,V. and Holm,L. (2008) PairsDB atlas of protein sequence space. Nucleic Acids Res., 36, D276-D280.
RSDB: representative protein sequence databases have high information content. J Park, L Holm, A Heger, C Chothia, Bioinformatics. 16Park,J., Holm,L., Heger,A. and Chothia,C. (2000) RSDB: representative protein sequence databases have high information content. Bioinformatics, 16, 458-464.
Data growth and its impact on the SCOP database: new developments. A Andreeva, D Howorth, J M Chandonia, S E Brenner, T J Hubbard, C Chothia, A G Murzin, Nucleic Acids Res. 36Andreeva,A., Howorth,D., Chandonia,J.M., Brenner,S.E., Hubbard,T.J., Chothia,C. and Murzin,A.G. (2008) Data growth and its impact on the SCOP database: new developments. Nucleic Acids Res., 36, D419-D425.
BLAT-the BLAST-like alignment tool. W J Kent, Genome Res. 12Kent,W.J. (2002) BLAT-the BLAST-like alignment tool. Genome Res., 12, 656-664.
QuickTree: building huge Neighbour-Joining trees of protein sequences. K Howe, A Bateman, R Durbin, Bioinformatics. 18Howe,K., Bateman,A. and Durbin,R. (2002) QuickTree: building huge Neighbour-Joining trees of protein sequences. Bioinformatics, 18, 1546-1547.
FastTree: computing large minimum evolution trees with profiles instead of a distance matrix. M N Price, P S Dehal, A P Arkin, Mol. Biol. Evol. 26Price,M.N., Dehal,P.S. and Arkin,A.P. (2009) FastTree: computing large minimum evolution trees with profiles instead of a distance matrix. Mol. Biol. Evol., 26, 1641-1650.
Protein homology detection by HMM-HMM comparison. J Soding, Bioinformatics. 21Soding,J. (2005) Protein homology detection by HMM-HMM comparison. Bioinformatics, 21, 951-960.
The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt): an expanding universe of protein information. C H Wu, R Apweiler, A Bairoch, D A Natale, W C Barker, B Boeckmann, S Ferro, E Gasteiger, H Huang, R Lopez, Nucleic Acids Res. 34Wu,C.H., Apweiler,R., Bairoch,A., Natale,D.A., Barker,W.C., Boeckmann,B., Ferro,S., Gasteiger,E., Huang,H., Lopez,R. et al. (2006) The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt): an expanding universe of protein information. Nucleic Acids Res., 34, D187-D191.
Predicting active site residue annotations in the Pfam database. J Mistry, A Bateman, R D Finn, BMC Bioinformatics. 8298Mistry,J., Bateman,A. and Finn,R.D. (2007) Predicting active site residue annotations in the Pfam database. BMC Bioinformatics, 8, 298.
HMM Logos for visualization of protein families. B Schuster-Bockler, J Schultz, S Rahmann, BMC Bioinformatics. 57Schuster-Bockler,B., Schultz,J. and Rahmann,S. (2004) HMM Logos for visualization of protein families. BMC Bioinformatics, 5, 7.
. J Ruan, H Li, Z Chen, A Coghlan, L J Coin, Y Guo, J K Heriche, Y Hu, K Kristiansen, R Li, Update. Nucleic Acids Res. 36Ruan,J., Li,H., Chen,Z., Coghlan,A., Coin,L.J., Guo,Y., Heriche,J.K., Hu,Y., Kristiansen,K., Li,R. et al. (2008) TreeFam: 2008 Update. Nucleic Acids Res., 36, D735-D740.
BioLit: integrating biological literature with databases. J L Fink, S Kushch, P R Williams, P E Bourne, Nucleic Acids Res. 36Fink,J.L., Kushch,S., Williams,P.R. and Bourne,P.E. (2008) BioLit: integrating biological literature with databases. Nucleic Acids Res., 36, W385-W389.
The Protein Feature Ontology: a tool for the unification of protein feature annotations. G A Reeves, K Eilbeck, M Magrane, C O&apos;donovan, L Montecchi-Palazzi, M A Harris, S Orchard, R C Jimenez, A Prlic, T J Hubbard, Bioinformatics. 24Reeves,G.A., Eilbeck,K., Magrane,M., O'Donovan,C., Montecchi- Palazzi,L., Harris,M.A., Orchard,S., Jimenez,R.C., Prlic,A., Hubbard,T.J. et al. (2008) The Protein Feature Ontology: a tool for the unification of protein feature annotations. Bioinformatics, 24, 2767-2772.
Rfam: updates to the RNA families database. P P Gardner, J Daub, J G Tate, E P Nawrocki, D L Kolbe, S Lindgreen, A C Wilkinson, R D Finn, S Griffiths-Jones, S R Eddy, Nucleic Acids Res. 37Gardner,P.P., Daub,J., Tate,J.G., Nawrocki,E.P., Kolbe,D.L., Lindgreen,S., Wilkinson,A.C., Finn,R.D., Griffiths-Jones,S., Eddy,S.R. et al. (2009) Rfam: updates to the RNA families database. Nucleic Acids Res., 37, D136-D140.


3273679:Prediction of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Phosphorylation Substrates


INTRODUCTION

The reversible modification of proteins by covalent addition and removal of phosphate is a major means by which cellular function is regulated [1,2]. The addition of phosphate, which is a sterically bulky and negatively charged moiety, can alter a protein's biochemical properties and affect its structure and activity. For example, phosphorylation can create docking sites to mediate protein interactions [2], modify signal sequences on proteins to regulate their subcellular localization [3], or activate enzymes by bringing their active sites into proper alignment [4]. Networks of phosphorylation-induced signaling can result in complex effects such as signal amplification, feedback inhibition or induction of cyclical oscillation between different cellular states [5][6][7][8]. Therefore, a computational tool that accurately predicts phosphorylation events could contribute to a more complete understanding of cell function [9].
Phosphorylation prediction algorithms must select, from all amino acid sequence space, a subset of amino acid sequences that are able to interact with one or more kinases as phosphate acceptors. The somewhat limited success of current phosphorylation prediction algorithms likely arises from the very large number and variety of both kinases and potential phosphate acceptors (Ser, Thr and Tyr residues) [2,10]. A major difficulty in protein phosphorylation prediction stems from the fact that each kinase has its own particular specificity determinants [11,12]. In some cases a particular kinase may require its substrate to have a highly stringent recognition site, whereas other kinases may be relatively promiscuous. Other kinases require restraints that may be distal to the recognition site, or consensus motif. Furthermore, it is possible that in certain cases, different kinases may have partially overlapping specificity, so that a single acceptor residue can be phosphorylated by more than one kinase. The challenge in developing a phosphorylation prediction tool is to effectively model molecular recognition mechanisms between individual kinases and their substrates, where the mechanisms can vary broadly for different kinases, and for which little experimental data may be available.
Most current strategies for the prediction of phosphorylation sites model the amino acid sequence (or a so-called consensus motif), which represents a kinase-specific phosphorylation site. Proteins that contain an instance of a given kinase's consensus motif are predicted to be substrates of that kinase. The simplest example of this type of strategy is linear motif searching, using computational tools such as PROSITE [13] and ELM [14]. This type of strategy searches for instances of phosphorylation consensus motifs represented by regular expressions. Other algorithms, such as ScanSite and PHOSITE utilize positionspecific profile searches, which allow for more flexible definitions of consensus motifs [15][16][17]. Machine learning approaches, (e.g. hidden Markov models [18][19][20] and artificial neural networks [9,21,22]) have been used to model interdependencies between amino acids within a given consensus motif. NetPhos and NetPhosK are leading methods for phosphorylation site prediction that utilize artificial neural networks. Certain other procedures such as PREDIKIN utilize three-dimensional structural modeling to try to predict kinase-specific phosphorylation [23].
Attempts to evaluate the effectiveness of any phosphorylation prediction method face a two-fold difficulty. First, since the complete set of phosphorylation sites on all proteins is not known, it is not possible to assess the comprehensiveness of phosphorylation prediction. Therefore, both ''false'' positive and ''true'' negative designations may actually be assigned incorrectly to true phosphorylation sites that have yet to be discovered. Second, since only a limited number of sites are known for many kinases, it is likely that the known set of phosphorylation sites for a particular kinase is systematically biased and that any given algorithm may be unwittingly designed or trained to miss true positives. The most reliable measure of confirmation of phosphorylation-site prediction is the identification of such sites as bona fide in vivo phosphorylation sites through experiment. Because this is often laborious and not straightforward, few broad-based computational phosphorylation prediction procedures have had their results substantially confirmed through experimental verification.

Strategy

One hallmark of nearly all published phosphorylation prediction procedures is that they employ a strategy to model the substrate specificity for as many kinases as possible. Such tools, which utilize the same strategy for different kinases, may inadvertently miss elements of substrate recognition that are in some way unique to a particular kinase system. Here, rather than developing a general model to predict substrates for many kinases, we instead propose a targeted procedure that models the substrate specificity in a more detailed way for a single well-studied family of kinases, i.e., the cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) [5,24,25]. By targeting a single family of kinases, we should be better positioned to consider discriminating factors specific to this family. Thus, in the present procedure we are able to incorporate additional global characteristics that occur specifically between Cdks and their substrates, introducing a second factor that are not considered when modeling only local sequence motifs.
Cdks are the master regulators of eukaryotic cell cycle progression, coordinating events such as DNA synthesis and mitosis that are necessary for proper cell division and driving the cell-division process in a regulated manner [5,24,25]. In order for Cdks to exhibit enzymatic activity, they must be associated with a binding partner protein called a cyclin. Particular Cdks are associated with one or more cyclins at different points in the cell cycle, and the sequential, temporally coordinated activity of the Cdk/cyclin combinations organizes and orders the molecular events in the cell cycle.
Cdks are obligatory proline-directed serine/threonine kinases. Empirical studies of Cdk substrates indicate a strict requirement for a proline residue one amino acid C-terminal to the acceptor residue (the ''+1'' site) [12] as well as a strong preference for basic amino acids proximal to the acceptor site, especially arginine or lysine residues at or around the +3 site (i.e., 3 residues C-terminal to the acceptor). These sequence characteristics are supported by X-ray crystal structures that reveal a large binding pocket for docking of the requisite proline residue, and an acidic patch for binding the C-terminal basic region [4,26,27]. The identity of other residues surrounding the acceptor site also plays a role, albeit smaller, in Cdk substrate preference. Studies on the catalytic activity of Cdc28 towards in vitro peptide phosphorylation show that substrates of different cyclin/Cdk combinations have largely the same primary sequence characteristics, although different combinations do exhibit slightly different preferences [28,29]. These subtle differences may have a considerable impact on cyclin/Cdk specificity, but other factors such as cyclin abundance, substrate binding and the presence or absence of substrate proteins may also play a significant role.
Studies by Holmes and Solomon [28] directly assayed for amino acid sequence specificity for Cdk phosphorylation. Their approach involved a series of experiments based on a GST fusion constructs, each containing a peptide based on the sequence KSPRK derived from the histone H1 Cdk substrate. The effects of all possible single amino acid substitutions at the 21, +2 and +3 positions (position 0 is the acceptor site, and +1 is the obligatory proline residue) were detailed for Xenopus laevis cyclin B-Cdc2 and human cyclin A-Cdc2, cyclin A-Cdk2, cyclin E-Cdk2, and cyclin B-Cdc2. Varying the -1 position was shown to have the least effect, with efficiency of phosphorylation changing, for example, about 2-fold between the worst (Pro) to the best (Gln and Met, followed by His and Gly) amino acids for the X. laevis cyclin B-Cdc2. The +2 position shows strong selectivity against Pro, Gln, Glu and Asp, with about one order of magnitude lower reaction efficiency than for Lys, Arg and Met, the amino acids contributing most positively to catalytic efficiency. Nearly all other amino acids are tolerated at this position, showing about 20-60% of wild-type efficiency. The +3 position is the most selective, with Arg and Lys being strongly preferred, His and Pro showing efficiency ,20% of wild type, and all the others showing efficiency ,5% of wild type, except for the acidic residues Glu and Asp which showed virtually no activity. The activity profiles for other cyclin-Cdk complexes were essential similar to that for cyclin B-Cdc2.
Our computational strategy focused on two characteristics of Cdk-substrate recognition. We first considered data to determine the primary substrate sequence preference, using published crystal structure and biochemical assay data. Second, we incorporated a number of observations indicating clustering [30] of phosphorylation sites within Cdk substrates. Many of the known Cdk substrates were phosphorylated at multiple sites in their sequence [3,[31][32][33][34]. Additionally, certain substrates were found to have a specific patch in their structure that bound cyclins (cyclinbinding, or Cy motif) [35,36], suggesting that the molecular recognition of substrate was influenced by contacts distal from the catalytic site. Biophysical studies on Pho85, a kinase in S. cerevisiae homologous to Cdc28, further showed semi-processive phosphorylation-i.e., one kinase-substrate binding event may be followed by several phosphate transfer events without dissociation of the enzyme and substrate proteins [37]. These findings led us to hypothesize that in many cases, Cdk substrates might contain clusters of phosphorylation sites, and therefore that Cdk substrate prediction could be improved not only by optimizing the consensus motif sequence, but also by following consensus site identification with selection of proteins whose sequences are enriched for repeats of that motif. If correct, such an approach will account for the physical mode of phosphorylation and will also overcome the statistical likelihood of false positive predictions based on single site predictions. Multi-site phosphorylation has been previously observed in several different Cdk substrates [37][38][39][40] One of the best examples of this is phosphorylation of Sic1 [39] by Cln-Cdc28 complexes, where multisite phosphorylation acts as a switch that sets a threshold for the onset of DNA synthesis during cell cycle.

RESULTS

Based on all the preceding considerations, we modeled Cdk substrates by identifying clusters of both the canonical Cdk motif represented by the regular expression [ST]PX[RK] and a PSSM [ Table 1] profile generated from Holmes and Solomon's kinetic data [28]. Proteins in the proteome of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae were scored according to both models, and the distribution of scores for each method was compared to the distribution of scores for sequences from a randomly generated mock proteome (see Methods). Based on these comparisons, we identified a set of candidate Cdk substrate proteins from S. cerevisiae, and evaluated that set against experimental data.

Clustered canonical motif-based modeling of Cdk substrates

The canonical Cdk phosphorylation motif, represented by the regular expression [ST]PX[RK], represents the most salient features of Cdk phosphorylation site composition and the largest contributions to catalytic efficiency of phosphorylation. It is a highly restrictive statement of a potential Cdk phosphorylation site, in the sense that it does not allow at all for phosphorylation site sequences that may deviate from these features. It accentuates the most influential aspects of site recognition and disregards the rest. The benefit of such an exclusive statement of the phosphorylation motif, then, is that it highlights the most likely phosphorylation sites. However, it is probable that this type of statement will result in underprediction, since not all substrates will have all of their actual phosphorylation sites in these stringent motifs.
Proteins from the yeast proteome were observed to contain between zero and 9 copies of the canonical phosphorylation motif. The majority of proteins in the yeast proteome (i.e., 4800) had no occurrences of the motif (score = 0), and as a trend, the number of proteins decreased as the score (i.e., the number of canonical motifs) increased [ Figure 1A]. A similar general trend was observed in the mock proteome. However, the rate of decrease was higher for the mock than for the yeast proteome [ Figure 1A]. In other words, the yeast proteome was enriched for high scoring proteins-suggesting that high scores may indeed be indicative of selection for function as Cdk substrates.
The following procedure was used to predict potential Cdk substrates in an unbiased fashion. For each integral score j between 0 and 9 inclusive, we calculated the ratio r j that represents the ratio of the proportion of proteins from the randomly generated mock proteome with score j to the proportion of yeast proteins with score j [ Figure 1B]. It appeared that at low scores of j, r j values were clustered close to unity (i.e., similar in real and mock), but at high scores of j, r j tended toward zero (i.e., enriched in real proteins and therefore candidate Cdk substrate) [ Figure 1B]. We determined a cut-off score k that would divide the yeast proteome into 2 groups, a group scoring below k where the number of real proteins is similar to the number of mock proteins, and a group scoring above k, that is enriched for real proteins. Therefore we solved for the value k that minimized the sum of the standard errors of the mean (SEM) over (i) all r j such that j,k, and (ii) all r j such that j. = k. We found this value of k to be equal to 5, yielding a lower scoring cluster with an SEM of 0.079 and a higher scoring cluster with an SEM of 0.032. Moreover, this value of k also maximizes the differences between the means of r j for the two clusters. The mean of r j,5 = 1.01, and the mean of r j. = 5 = 0.078.
A total of 38 yeast proteins scored above the threshold value (k = 5) that separated random from significant predicted substrates [ Table 2, Table S1]. These 38 included the known Cdk substrates Ace2, Cdc6, Cdh1, Orc2, Sld2, Stb1 and Ste20 [ Table 2]. [32,[39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46] When compared to the results of a proteomic survey of in vitro Cdc28 phosphorylation by Ubersax et al. [47], 25 of the 38 proteins were found in their set of 186 best candidate Cdc28 substrates [ Table 2]. In addition, six of the 38 proteins, Cdh1, Lte1, Bem3, Bud3, Ace2 and Ypl267 have been found to physically interact with cyclin/Cdc28 complexes via co-immunoaffinity purification [ Table 2] [48].
This method did not predict all known in vivo Cdc28 substrates [Supplementary Table S2 reviews and references known Cdc28 substrates]. For example, some known substrates such as Sic1 [31,39,49], although containing clustered minimal Cdk motifs, do not contain sufficient copies of the full canonical consensus motif to exceed the cut-off value of k = 5.

Clustered kinetics-based PSSM modeling of Cdk substrates

Based on kinetic phosphorylation data [28], we used the PSSMbased approach to model the probability for each of the 20 amino acids at positions -1 through +4 to be present surrounding minimal Cdk phosphorylation motifs [50]. The score for a protein equals the sum of the PSSM score for each potential Cdk site, as defined by Equations 1 and 2 and the PSSM in Table 1. The general trends using this scoring model were similar to those using the canonical consensus regular expression motif scoring system: as the score increased, the occurrence of proteins decreased, with more real proteins than mock proteins at high scores [ Figure 2A]. The range of PSSM scores are continuous values, rather than the discrete integral values obtained from regular expression scoring. Therefore, in order to perform analogous discrete analysis for the two scoring systems, we grouped the proteins into bins 0.4 units wide according to their summed PSSM scores.
In this way, we determined that a value of k = 4.4 minimized the sum of the SEM of r j,k and the SEM of r j. = k and maximized the differences between the means of the two clusters; the mean for the lower scoring group r j,k = 0.96 and the mean for the higher    scoring group r j. = k = 0.11 [ Figure 2B]. Here, there appears to be a region of transition from high to low, between the scores of 3.    and above), yeast proteome contains substantially more proteins than mock, and the ratio of mock/yeast approaches zero. All proteins from the yeast proteome scoring 4.4or higher are considered candidate substrates. The region between 3.2 and 4.4 is considered a transition region and yeast proteins with these scores are considered borderline candidate substrates doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000656.g002 substrates is likely low, and the lower boundary of a SEMminimized cluster of high scoring proteins (with a mean r j. = m = 0.11), which is likely highly enriched for bona fide substrates. The region between l and m defines a borderline area that likely contains a mix of substrates and non-substrates. In this case, we found that m = k, defining exactly the same high scoring region likely to contain Cdk substrates, regardless of whether or not we choose to define the borderline region.
The above-described unbiased analysis determined a set of 35 likely Cdk substrate proteins scoring above 4.4, and 55 borderline proteins scoring between 3.2 and 4.4 [ Table 2]. Twenty-three of the 35 high scoring candidate substrates were also predicted using regular expression scoring; 6 of the 55 borderline candidates overlapped with regular expression motif scoring candidates [ Table 2]. Ace2, Cdh1, Orc2, Sld2, Stb1 were among the known substrates that were predicted both using the canonical regular expression motif and the kinetic PSSM [32,[43][44][45]51,52]. Cdc6 [42,43] and Ste20 [40,46] are known substrates predicted using the canonical regular expression motif and considered borderline proteins using the kinetic PSSM. Orc6 [43] and Swi5 [34] are known substrates that were predicted by the PSSM method only. Far1, Ndd1, Net 1 and Pds1 are known substrates that were missed using the canonical regular expression motif and considered borderline proteins using the kinetic PSSM [7,8,33,53,54].
Additionally, 22 of these 35 candidates matched the top scoring in vitro substrates [47]. Four candidates, Ace2, Cdh1, Bem3 and Ypl267, were found to physically interact with cyclin/Cdc28 complexes by co-immunoaffinity purification [48]. Twenty-two of the 55 borderline candidates were found to be substrates in the in vitro study and two, Bud3 and Far1, were found previously to interact physically with cyclin/Cdc28 complexes.
Using mass spectrometry [38], we were able to determine phosphorylation at Cdk motifs for several predicted substrates. In these experiments, we found in vitro phosphorylation of recombinant Mcm3 which had been incubated with ATP and affinitypurified Cdc28 complexes. We also found in vivo phosphorylation at Cdk motifs on Ace2, Swi5, Orc2 and Orc6.

DISCUSSION

We have presented here a model for cyclin-dependent kinase substrates. The model first defines a bioinformatic representation of the Cdk phosphorylation motif, either as a regular expression or a PSSM. In addition, the model proposes that a significant proportion of Cdk phosphorylation occurs on proteins that contain multiple phosphorylation sites. The non-random clustering of potential Cdk sites in particular proteins serves as evidence of biological function selected for by nature.
The canonical motif and PSSM strategies, combined, define a set of 91 candidate Cdk substrate proteins comprising 1.5% the yeast proteome. Of these, 46 (0.73% of the yeast proteome) were defined as strong candidates, either being detected using the canonical-motif scoring method, or scoring above the upper cutoff using PSSM-motif method. Twenty-seven were detected using only the canonical-motif method, 8 using only the PSSM-motif method, and 11 by both methods. The remaining 45 (0.72% of the yeast proteome) predicted candidates were ''borderline'' PSSM candidates only.
By comparison, only 0.10% of the sequences in the randomized mock proteome scored above the threshold for inclusion as strong candidates, and 0.45% of the sequences in the mock proteome met the score criteria for borderline, PSSM candidates (but not strong candidates). The ratio of candidate substrates detected in yeast-tocandidates substrates detected in mock yields an estimated false positive rate of 14% for the strong candidates and 63% for the borderline candidates. These values indicate that there is indeed clustering on the sequence level beyond what would be expected by random. From them we can infer that ,40 of the 46 strong candidates and ,17 of the 45 borderline candidates are bona fide Cdk substrates. Thus, although the false positive rate for the borderline candidates is high, that subset is nevertheless not inconsequential to biological researchers, since greater than 1 in 3 are likely to be bona fide substrates.
Out of the total set of 91 candidate substrates, 13 proteins (14%) are contained in the set of experimentally characterized in vivo substrates. To our knowledge, at the time of writing there are 26 proteins in that set (Table S2); thus 50% of the currently known substrates were detected as candidates. For reasons detailed below, we expect this method to be less than comprehensive, but rather to yield a set of likely candidate substrates useful for biological researchers while maintaining a reasonably low false positive rate. Extrapolating from our false positive and false negative rates, we expect there to be approximately 114 total proteins (1.9% of the yeast proteome) that are Cdc28 substrates.
Many of our candidate substrates were also predicted to contain Cdk phosphorylation sites using other leading phosphorylation detection algorithms, such as Scansite and NetPhosK. Scansite, using a threshold setting of ''high'' returns 265 yeast proteins (4.2% of the proteome) as candidate Cdk substrates. Of these, 35 are contained in our set of 91 candidate substrates (38%). Scansite predicts 8 of the 24 well-characterized candidate substrates (33%), as compared to the 50% hit rate using our method. When Scansite was run on our random sequence database, 2.8% of the sequences were detected as candidate Cdk substrates -a false positive rate of 67% for Scansite, for Cdk substrate prediction in this dataset. Therefore, although the present method was only somewhat more comprehensive (50% to 33%) than Scansite with respect to true positive detection, it was much more accurate in terms of false positive rate. Our method generates a set of strong candidates with an estimated false positive rate of 14%, while Scansite, even set to high stringency yields a false positive rate of 67%. Scansite yields a false positive rate similar to that of the borderline candidates (63%) generated using the current method.
NetPhosK [9] detected 88 of our 91 (97%) candidates as containing Cdk substrates, using a scoring threshold of 0.602 a similar true positive rate as Scansite. However, our simulations indicate that fully 21% of the proteome, or 1300 proteins, is predicted by NetPhosK to be Cdk substrates, and so the false positive rate is expected to be even higher for NetPhosK than for Scansite. Thus, the major difference between two leading current phosphorylation prediction methods and the one presented hereprotein-level motif clustering-is recognized as an increase in accuracy as measured by a reduced false positive rate.
Our method predicts approximately half of the known yeast Cdk substrates. Therefore, in this study, we make no claim at completeness. Instead, we show the utility of a targeted bioinformatic tool that produces a set of predictions that can be validated using experimental techniques. Our pilot proteomic study, in which we assayed for in vivo phosphorylation using hypothesisdriven mass spectrometry [38,55], confirms a number of our predictions [ Table 2]. In addition, our predictions are also consistent with many of the high scoring proteins from the highthroughput in vitro phosphorylation study by Ubersax et al. [47], although most of these are as of yet unconfirmed in vivo.
Our model, as it stands, is particularly useful for organisms with small proteomes, such as S. cerevisiae. Larger proteomes may be problematic because the false positive rate likely will increase with the number and size of proteins. To extend this procedure effectively may require additional filtering procedures. For example, phosphorylation sites are largely expected to occur on solvent-accessible portions of proteins, particularly loops, so an additional weight could be added to motifs that are expected to occur in such regions, as determined by existing secondary structure prediction [56] or homology modeling algorithms [57]. Incorporating the conservation of phosphorylation motifs across related species into the model might also increase its specificity by adding additional biological restraints. However, this has proven to be not a straightforward task, complicated by the fact that orthologous candidate substrates show homologous regions that are enriched for Cdk motifs, but where in many cases the number and precise positioning of the motifs are not very precisely conserved. Supplemental Table S3 shows some examples of the imperfect conservation of Cdk motifs across taxa in Cdk substrates. New algorithms are needed in order to properly account for these factors when performing multiple alignments of Cdk substrates.
Furthermore, the semi-processive physical model [37] of Cdk phosphorylation also suggests that the clustering of sites likely occurs on contiguous surfaces or individual domains of proteins. The average spacing between motifs for candidate substrates identified in our study by canonical motif scoring is 103+/263 (mean+/2standard deviation) amino acids residues, and by PSSM scoring is 69+/246 residues. Among the candidate substrates, the subset that overlaps with known, experimentally characterized Cdk substrates, the average spacing was smaller than (63+/237 for canonical motif scoring, and 38+/220 for PSSM scoring) but statistically indistinguishable from spacing for the overall set of candidate substrates. Such large spaces between sites suggest that three-dimensional, domain level proximity, rather than simply linear spacing plays an important role in the processivity of Cdk2. Further exploration is necessary to determine the feasibility of using spacing data, or 3-D data for increasing the selectivity of the procedure.
The algorithm missed certain known yeast substrates such as Cdc23 [58] that are thought to contain single phosphorylation sites. However Cdc23 is present in cells in complex with the proteins Cdc16 and Cdc27 [58], both of which also have multiple putative Cdk phosphorylation sties. Therefore, it is reasonable to hypothesize that the kinase recognizes and phosphorylates a surface of the entire complex that is formed by the junction of all three proteins. As data on protein complexes [59][60][61] becomes more comprehensive and reliable, it may become feasible to statistically analyze the presence of Cdk motifs within complexes in a similar manner to that done for individual proteins. We note here that the domain-level clustering of motifs here likely differs from the local clustering observed in the substrates of kinases such as the casein kinases [62][63][64], GSK3 [64,65] and SR specific protein kinases [66,67], where multiple phosphorylation sites are observed within a single extended motif or repeat region.
The success of the computational procedure presented here stresses the importance of not being limited to local sequence characteristics for functional prediction. The difficulty in the prediction of post-translational modifications and in phosphorylation prediction in particular, is that short, local sequences-even those that match an extremely well defined consensus-can occur frequently by random sequence drift. In the present study, we found useful the fact that Cdk substrates not only have consensus motifs that have been well studied and could be quite precisely defined, but also had the characteristic of site clustering. We incorporated both global and local sequence characteristics of Cdk substrates into a bioinformatic model that proved successful in predicting a significant number of putative substrates. A sub-stantial amount of experimental information obtained by us and other leads us to believe that this set of putative substrates is, in fact, highly enriched for bona fide Cdk substrates. This set of proteins includes a substantial proportion of known substrates from previous in vivo and in vitro studies, as well as substrates that were confirmed as in vivo phosphorylation sites by mass spectrometry. In the future, these types of approaches-incorporating biochemical details into bioinformatics, and interfacing bioinformatics with experimental testing-should prove to be a useful strategy in predictive computational biology.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

For regular expression consensus motif searches, an algorithm was implemented that scored all proteins in the yeast proteome according to the number of occurrences of the motif. Proteins were scored as the number of phosphorylation motifs within their sequence. For PSSM consensus motif scoring, a PSSM was constructed by assigning a score to each amino acid in each relevant position directly proportional to its effect on catalytic efficiency based on Holmes and Solomon's [28] kinetic data. The specific structure and values of this PSSM can be found in Table 1. These scores were stored in a table-the positions relative to the phosphate acceptor residue was represented on one axis of the table, and the twenty individual amino acids were represented on the other axis. Each protein was scored as follows. First, the information content for each position was calculated from the PSSM using the standard relative entropy definition at each position using the equation:
where p i is the observed probability of amino acid i (at a given position) in the motif, and f i is the background frequency of amino acid i in the proteome. The information content at each position should be directly related to its discriminatory power in predicting phosphorylation substrates of Cdk. Then, for each protein, all Ser-Pro and Thr-Pro (the minimal requirement for phosphorylation by Cdk) sequences in a protein sequence were located, and each Ser-Pro and Thr-Pro sequences were scored based on the 5 amino acid window around it (from 21 to +3) around it as:
score(S=T i P iz1 )~I bits ( À 1) Ã P aa (AA iÀ1 )zI bits (z2)Ã P aa (AA iz2 )zI bits (z3) Ã P aa (AA iz3 ) ð2Þ
where I bits (n) is the total information content at position n, as defined above, and P aa (n k ) is the probability of amino acid n (any one of the 20 amino acids) at position k. This scheme yields a score for each motif that is weighted both by the information content at each position, and by the relative likelihood of the amino acid found at that position. This gives proportionally more weight to positions that possess more discriminatory power. Proteins are scored as the aggregate of the score of their individual potential Cdk phosphorylation sites. This type of scoring accounts for both the 'goodness' of each potential phosphorylation site and the enrichment (and possible clustering) of potential sites within the protein sequence. The score of a protein is defined as the sum of all scores (S/T i P i+1 ) for that protein sequence. The scorings of protein using the regular expression version of the phosphorylation motif can also be represented using this system, by assigning a value of one for relative information to each relevant position and assigning a score of 1 for each match to the regular expression found in a given protein sequence.
A set of randomly generated amino acid sequences, collectively having identical amino acid composition and protein length distributions as the actual yeast proteome, was used as a negative control. The Cdk phosphorylation motifs found in this 'mock proteome' represent the amino acid distribution if it were truly random. Deviations from the random distribution are likely to result from selective pressure on protein sequences, and therefore to reflect biological functionality as phosphorylation substrates.
Scripts were written in PERL on and executed on a multi-CPU Sun server running Solaris 10 to find putative phosphorylation sites and compute their scores for each yeast protein sequence and mock protein sequence using the formulae (1) and (2) as described above. Multiple alignments were performed using the World-Wide Web based clustalW [68,69] server hosted by EMBL.   Table S3 Conservation and alignment of Cdk phosphorylation motifs. Sequences matching canonical and minimal Cdk motifs are highlighted in bold, demonstrating imperfect conservation of motifs across organisms. While some motifs show near perfect alignment, other sites appear in the same general area across the organisms, but are not aligned precisely by the ClustalW organism, either due to differing numbers of sites, or different locations within the protein sequence. Such imperfect alignment corroborates the proposition that selection has occurred on Cdk substrates to favor domain-level clustered phosphorylation. Note for example, that the S. cerevisiae Orc6 (example A) sequence contains four motifs around residue 105-124, three of which nearly perfectly align with the corresponding A. gossypii sequence, while K. lactis contains only two corresponding motifs, and C. albicans only one. Another good example is in the region corresponding to residues 300-340 in S. cerevisiae Swi5 (example C), which contains four Cdk motifs. The corresponding region in A gosyppi contains 5 motifs, and in C. albicans contains 6 motifs, none of which align well with the S. cerevisiae motifs, while the K. lactis contains only 1 single motif in the regions.

SUPPORTING INFORMATION


Table 1 .

1Position-specific scoring matrix representing the Cdk phosphorylation motif . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10.1371/journal.pone.0000656.t001 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Figure 1 .

1Analysis of Canonical Cdk Motif Clustering in Yeast and Mock Proteomes. (A) The number of proteins having a given score decreases as that score increases. Yeast proteins are represented in navy, and mock proteins are represented in magenta. At low score, (i.e. less than ,4), yeast and mock are similar-the ratio of mock to yeast, shown by black squares, approximates unity (B). However at higher scores (i.e. 5 and above), yeast proteome contains substantially more proteins than mock (A), and the ratio of mock/yeast approaches zero (B). All proteins from the yeast proteome scoring 5 or higher are considered candidate substrates. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000656.g001
2 to 4.0 (as opposed to the sharp break between scores of 4 and 5 observed with the regular expression scoring system). To determine the transition area in an unbiased manner, we calculated two values, l and m (such that l, = m) that also minimizes the sum of the SEM of r j,l and the SEM of r j. = m . We found values of l = 3.2 and m = 4.4. The values of l and m define respectively the upper boundary of a SEM-minimized cluster of low scoring proteins (with a mean r j,l = 1.04) where the enrichment of Cdk

Figure 2 .

2Analysis of kinetic-derived PSSM motif clustering. The number of proteins having a given score decreases as that score increases. Yeast proteins are represented in navy, and mock proteins are represented in magenta. At low score, (I.e. less than ,3.2), yeast and mock are similar-the ratio of mock to yeast, shown by black squares, approximates unity. (Proteins are grouped in bins 0.4 units wide) However at higher scores (I.e. 4.4
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000656.s003 (0.04 MB DOC)

Table 2 .

2Bioinformatic screen for candidates Cdc28 substrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Protein Name 
Candidate (Reg Expr) Candidate (PSSM) 
Borderline (PSSM) In Vivo a Substrate 
In Vitro b Substrate 
Cyclin c Interactor
Rad9 
9 
8.14 
x
Lte1 
8 
7.48 
x 
Clb2
Swi5 * 
8 
7.97 
Yes 
x
Yer041w 
8 
5.61
Ace2 * 
7 
7.14 
Yes 
x 
Clb3
Ase1 
7 
5.53 
x
Ash1 
7 
6.41 
x
Sli15 
7 
6.86
Bud4 
6 
5.22 
x
Cdh1 
6 
4.42 
Yes 
x 
Cln2/Clb3
Fir1 
6 
5.91 
x
Orc2 * 
6 
6.08 
Yes 
x 
Clb5**
Zrg8 
6 
5.47
Bck1 
5 
4.85 
x
Bem3 
5 
6.52 
x 
Cln2
Boi1 
5 
4.30
Bud3 
5 
4.03 
x 
Clb2
Caf120 
5 
5.86 
x
Cdc15 
5 
3.43
Cdc6 
5 
3.96 
Yes 
Clb2
Exo84 
5 
3.86 
x
Fin1 
5 
x
Hcm1 
5 
3.80 
x
Hpr5 
5 
4.78 
x
Lre1 
5 
4.62 
x
Mcm3 * 
5 
4.46 
x
Mse1 
5 
3.93
Pak1 
5 
4.89 
x
Pkc1 
5 
5.70 
x
Pms1 
5 
5.31
Rga2 
5 
4.86 
x
Sfi1 
5 
x
Sir4 
5 
5.24 
x
Sld2 
5 
5.69 
Yes
Smc4 
5 
3.32 
x
Stb1 
5 
4.75 
Yes 
x
Ste20 
5 
4.33 
Yes 
Cln2
Ypl267w 
5 
4.47 
x 
Cln2
Bni4 
5.86
Iqg1 
4.62
Orc6 * 
4.44 
Yes 
x 
Clb5**
Plm2 
4.96
Rpo21 
4.45
Ssn2 
5.12
Yjl051w 
4.88
Ymr124w 
4.67
Acc1 
3.30
Bni1 
4.36 
x
Chd1 
3.86
Dal81 
3.27 
x
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Protein Name 
Candidate (Reg Expr) Candidate (PSSM) 
Borderline (PSSM) In Vivo a Substrate 
In Vitro b Substrate 
Cyclin c Interactor
Dna2 
3.45 
x
Far1 
3.46 
Yes 
x 
Cln2/Clb5
Fun30 
3.67 
x
Fun31 
3.32
Gac1 
3.58
Hpc2 
3.50
Inp52 
3.75
Kel1 
3.36 
x 
Clb2
Leu1 
3.45
Mds3 
4.06 
Clb3
Mlp1 
3.39 
x
Mps2 
3.32
Mpt1 
3.52
Msb1 
3.34 
x
Myo3 
3.28 
x
Ndd1 
3.46 
Yes 
x
Net1 
3.38 
Yes 
x
Nup60 
3.50 
x
Pds1 
3.28 
Yes 
x
Pkh2 
3.59
Rim15 
3.38
Sac3 
3.36
Spa2 
3.61 
x
Swi4 
3.29
Tfg1 
3.63
Tra1 
4.29
Tus1 
3.39 
x
Ubp2 
3.70
Ulp2 
3.25 
x
Ycr033w 
4.19
Ydl239c 
3.38
Ygr271w 
3.50
Yhr080c 
3.24
Yil112w 
3.81
Yjl084w 
3.43 
x
Ynr047w 
3.45
Yor066w 
4.22 
x
Yor129c 
3.32
Yor177c 
3.34
Yox1 
3.29
Zip1 
3.37 
x
a see Supplementary Table S2. 
b Reference [47]
c
Reference[48]
*
Phosphorylation confirmed via mass spectrometry 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000656.t002

Table 2 .

2cont. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Table S1

S1Accession numbers and descriptions of candidate substrates. Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000656.s001 (0.03 MB DOC)

Table S2

S2Compilation of currently known substrates of Cdc28. Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000656.s002 (0.04 MB DOC)
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
August 2007 | Issue 8 | e656
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Author ContributionsConceived and designed the experiments: EC. Performed the experiments: EC RB. Analyzed the data: BC TG EC RB. Contributed reagents/ materials/analysis tools: BC TG EC. Wrote the paper: BC EC.
The regulation of protein function by multisite phosphorylationa 25 year update. P Cohen, Trends Biochem Sci. 25Cohen P (2000) The regulation of protein function by multisite phosphorylation- a 25 year update. Trends Biochem Sci 25: 596-601.
Signaling-2000 and beyond. T Hunter, Cell. 100Hunter T (2000) Signaling-2000 and beyond. Cell 100: 113-127.
Phosphorylation-and ubiquitin-dependent degradation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor Far1p in budding yeast. S Henchoz, Y Chi, B Catarin, I Herskowitz, R J Deshaies, Genes Dev. 11Henchoz S, Chi Y, Catarin B, Herskowitz I, Deshaies RJ, et al. (1997) Phosphorylation-and ubiquitin-dependent degradation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor Far1p in budding yeast. Genes Dev 11: 3046-3060.
The structural basis for specificity of substrate and recruitment peptides for cyclin-dependent kinases. N Brown, M Noble, J Endicott, L Johnson, Nat Cell Biology. 1Brown N, Noble M, Endicott J, Johnson L (1999) The structural basis for specificity of substrate and recruitment peptides for cyclin-dependent kinases. Nat Cell Biology 1: 438-443.
Starting the cell cycle: what's the point?. F R Cross, Curr Opin Cell Biol. 7Cross FR (1995) Starting the cell cycle: what's the point? Curr Opin Cell Biol 7: 790-797.
Testing a mathematical model of the yeast cell cycle. F R Cross, V Archambault, M Miller, M Klovstad, Mol Biol Cell. 13Cross FR, Archambault V, Miller M, Klovstad M (2002) Testing a mathematical model of the yeast cell cycle. Mol Biol Cell 13: 52-70.
Phosphorylation by cyclin B-Cdk underlies release of mitotic exit activator Cdc14 from the nucleolus. R Azzam, S Chen, W Shou, A Mah, G Alexandru, Science. 305Azzam R, Chen S, Shou W, Mah A, Alexandru G, et al. (2004) Phosphorylation by cyclin B-Cdk underlies release of mitotic exit activator Cdc14 from the nucleolus. Science 305: 516-519.
Mass spectrometry-based methods for phosphorylation site mapping of hyperphosphorylated proteins applied to Net1, a regulator of exit from mitosis in yeast. Loughrey Chen, S Huddleston, M J Shou, W Deshaies, R J Annan, R S , Mol Cell Proteomics. 1Loughrey Chen S, Huddleston MJ, Shou W, Deshaies RJ, Annan RS, et al. (2002) Mass spectrometry-based methods for phosphorylation site mapping of hyperphosphorylated proteins applied to Net1, a regulator of exit from mitosis in yeast. Mol Cell Proteomics 1: 186-196.
Prediction of post-translational glycosylation and phosphorylation of proteins from the amino acid sequence. N Blom, T Sicheritz-Ponten, R Gupta, S Gammeltoft, S Brunak, Proteomics. 4Blom N, Sicheritz-Ponten T, Gupta R, Gammeltoft S, Brunak S (2004) Prediction of post-translational glycosylation and phosphorylation of proteins from the amino acid sequence. Proteomics 4: 1633-1649.
Kinomic: methods for deciphering the kinome. S Johnson, T Hunter, Nat Methods. 2Johnson S, Hunter T (2005) Kinomic: methods for deciphering the kinome. Nat Methods 2: 17-25.
How do protein kinases recognize their substrates?. L Pinna, M Ruzzene, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. 1314Pinna L, Ruzzene M (1996) How do protein kinases recognize their substrates? Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1314: 191-225.
Cellular substrates of p34(cdc2) and its companion cyclindependent kinases. E A Nigg, Trends Cell Biol. 3Nigg EA (1993) Cellular substrates of p34(cdc2) and its companion cyclin- dependent kinases. Trends Cell Biol 3: 296-301.
PROSITE: a dictionary of sites and patterns in proteins. A Bairoch, Nucleic Acids Res. 19Bairoch A (1991) PROSITE: a dictionary of sites and patterns in proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 19: 2241-2245.
ELM server: A new resource for investigating short functional sites in modular eukarotic proteins. Puntervoll, Nucleic Acids Res. 31Puntervoll P al. e (2003) ELM server: A new resource for investigating short functional sites in modular eukarotic proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 31: 3625-3630.
The PROSITE database, its status in 2002. L Falquet, M Pagni, P Bucher, N Hulo, C Sigrist, Nucleic Acids Res. 30Falquet L, Pagni M, Bucher P, Hulo N, Sigrist C, et al. (2002) The PROSITE database, its status in 2002. Nucleic Acids Res 30: 235-238.
Scansite 2.0: Proteome-wide prediction of cell signaling interactions using short sequence motifs. J Obenauer, L C Cantley, M Yaffe, Nucleic Acids Res. 31Obenauer J, Cantley LC, Yaffe M (2003) Scansite 2.0: Proteome-wide prediction of cell signaling interactions using short sequence motifs. Nucleic Acids Res 31: 3635-3641.
A motif-based profile scanning approach for genome-wide prediction of signaling pathways. M Yaffe, G Leparc, J Lai, T Obata, S Volinia, Nat Biotechnol. 19Yaffe M, Leparc G, Lai J, Obata T, Volinia S, et al. (2001) A motif-based profile scanning approach for genome-wide prediction of signaling pathways. Nat Biotechnol 19: 348-355.
KinasePhos: a web tool for identifying protein kinase-specific phosphorylation sites. H Huang, T Lee, S Tzeng, J Horng, Nucleic Acids Res. 33Huang H, Lee T, Tzeng S, Horng J (2005) KinasePhos: a web tool for identifying protein kinase-specific phosphorylation sites. Nucleic Acids Res 33: W226-W229.
Incorporating hidden Markov models for identifying protein kinase-specific phosphorylation sites. H Huang, T Lee, S Tzeng, L Wu, J Horng, J Comput Chem. 26Huang H, Lee T, Tzeng S, Wu L, Horng J, et al. (2005) Incorporating hidden Markov models for identifying protein kinase-specific phosphorylation sites. J Comput Chem 26: 1032-1041.
Predicting the phosphorylation sites using hidden Markov models and machine learning methods. P Senawongse, A Dalby, Z Yang, J Chem Inf Model. 45Senawongse P, Dalby A, Yang Z (2005) Predicting the phosphorylation sites using hidden Markov models and machine learning methods. J Chem Inf Model 45: 1147-1152.
Sequence and structure-based prediction of eukaryotic protein phosphorylation sites. N Blom, S Gammeltoft, S Brunak, J Mol Biol. 294Blom N, Gammeltoft S, Brunak S (1999) Sequence and structure-based prediction of eukaryotic protein phosphorylation sites. J Mol Biol 294: 1351-1362.
Artificial neural networks for molecular sequence analysis. C Wu, Comput Chem. 21Wu C (1997) Artificial neural networks for molecular sequence analysis. Comput Chem 21: 237-256.
Structural basis and prediction of substrate specificity in protein serine/threonine kinases. R Brinkworth, R Breinl, B Kobe, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 100Brinkworth R, Breinl R, Kobe B (2003) Structural basis and prediction of substrate specificity in protein serine/threonine kinases. Proc Natl Acad Sci, USA 100: 74-79.
The cyclin family of budding yeast: abundant use of a good idea. B Andrews, V Measday, Trends in Genetics. 14Andrews B, Measday V (1998) The cyclin family of budding yeast: abundant use of a good idea. Trends in Genetics 14: 66-72.
Control of the yeast cell cycle by the Cdc28 protein kinase. K Nasmyth, Curr Opin in Cell Biol. 5Nasmyth K (1993) Control of the yeast cell cycle by the Cdc28 protein kinase. Curr Opin in Cell Biol 5: 166-179.
Mechanisms of cyclin-dependent kinase regulation: structures of Cdks, their cyclin activators and Cip and INK4 inhibitors. N Pavletich, J Mol Biol. 287Pavletich N (1999) Mechanisms of cyclin-dependent kinase regulation: structures of Cdks, their cyclin activators and Cip and INK4 inhibitors. J Mol Biol 287: 821-828.
Cyclin-dependent kinases: engines, clocks and microprocessors. D O Morgan, Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 13Morgan DO (1997) Cyclin-dependent kinases: engines, clocks and micropro- cessors. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 13: 261-291.
A predictive scale for evaluating cyclin-dependent kinase substrates. A comparison of p34cdc2 and p33cdk2. J Holmes, M Solomon, J Biol Chem. 271Holmes J, Solomon M (1996) A predictive scale for evaluating cyclin-dependent kinase substrates. A comparison of p34cdc2 and p33cdk2. J Biol Chem 271: 25240-25246.
Use of an oriented peptide library to determine the optimal substrates of protein kinases. Z Songyang, S Blechner, N Hoagland, M F Hoekstra, H Piwnica-Worms, Curr Biol. 4Songyang Z, Blechner S, Hoagland N, Hoekstra MF, Piwnica-Worms H, et al. (1994) Use of an oriented peptide library to determine the optimal substrates of protein kinases. Curr Biol 4: 973-982.
Clustering of phosphorylation site recognition motifs can be exploited to predict the targets of cyclin-dependent kinase. A Moses, J Heriche, R Durbin, Genome Biol. 823Moses A, Heriche J, Durbin R (2007) Clustering of phosphorylation site recognition motifs can be exploited to predict the targets of cyclin-dependent kinase. Genome Biol 8: R23.
Phosphorylation of Sic1p by G1 Cdk required for its degradation and entry into S phase. R Verma, R S Annan, M J Huddleston, S A Carr, G Reynard, Science. 278Verma R, Annan RS, Huddleston MJ, Carr SA, Reynard G, et al. (1997) Phosphorylation of Sic1p by G1 Cdk required for its degradation and entry into S phase. Science 278: 455-460.
Inhibitory phosphorylation of the APC regulator Hct1 is controlled by the kinase Cdc28 and the phosphatase Cdc14. S Jaspersen, C Jf, D Morgan, Curr Biol. 9Jaspersen S, JF C, Morgan D (1999) Inhibitory phosphorylation of the APC regulator Hct1 is controlled by the kinase Cdc28 and the phosphatase Cdc14. Curr Biol 9: 227-236.
Pheromone-dependent G1 cell cycle arrest requires Far1 phosphorylation, but may not involve inhibition of Cdc28-Cln2, in vivo. A Gartner, A Jovanovic, D Jeoung, S Bourlat, F R Cross, Mol Cell Biol. 18Gartner A, Jovanovic A, Jeoung D, Bourlat S, Cross FR, et al. (1998) Pheromone-dependent G1 cell cycle arrest requires Far1 phosphorylation, but may not involve inhibition of Cdc28-Cln2, in vivo. Mol Cell Biol 18: 3681-3691.
The role of phosphorylation and the Cdc28 protein kinase in cell cycle-regulated nuclear import of the S. cerevisiae transcription factor SWI5. T Moll, G Tebb, U Surana, H Robitsch, K Nasmyth, Cell. 66Moll T, Tebb G, Surana U, Robitsch H, Nasmyth K (1991) The role of phosphorylation and the Cdc28 protein kinase in cell cycle-regulated nuclear import of the S. cerevisiae transcription factor SWI5. Cell 66: 743-758.
A conserved cyclin-binding domain determines functional interplay between anaphasepromoting complex-Cdh1 and cyclin A-Cdk2 during cell cycle progression. C Sorensen, C Lukas, E Kramer, J-M Oeters, J Bartek, Mol Cell Biol. 21Sorensen C, Lukas C, Kramer E, Oeters J-M, Bartek J, et al. (2001) A conserved cyclin-binding domain determines functional interplay between anaphase- promoting complex-Cdh1 and cyclin A-Cdk2 during cell cycle progression. Mol Cell Biol 21: 3692-3703.
A bipartitie substrate recognition motif for cyclin-dependent kinases. D Takeda, J Wohlschlegel, A Dutta, J Biol Chem. 276Takeda D, Wohlschlegel J, Dutta A (2001) A bipartitie substrate recognition motif for cyclin-dependent kinases. J Biol Chem 276: 1993-1997.
Multi-site phosphorylation of Pho4 by the cyclin-Cdk Pho80-Pho85 is semi-processive with site preferences. D Jeffery, M Springer, D King, O&apos; Shea, E , J Mol Biol. 306Jeffery D, Springer M, King D, O'Shea E (2001) Multi-site phosphorylation of Pho4 by the cyclin-Cdk Pho80-Pho85 is semi-processive with site preferences. J Mol Biol 306.
Analysis of Protein Phosphorylation by Hypothesis-Driven Multiple-Stage Mass Spectrometry. E J Chang, V Archambault, D T Mclachlin, A N Krutchinsky, B T Chait, Anal Chem. 76Chang EJ, Archambault V, McLachlin DT, Krutchinsky AN, Chait BT (2004) Analysis of Protein Phosphorylation by Hypothesis-Driven Multiple-Stage Mass Spectrometry. Anal Chem 76: 4472-4483.
Multisite phosphorylation of a Cdk inhibitor sets a threshold for the onset of DNA replication. P Nash, X Tang, S Orlicky, Q Chen, F Gerlter, Nature. 414Nash P, Tang X, Orlicky S, Chen Q, Gerlter F, et al. (2001) Multisite phosphorylation of a Cdk inhibitor sets a threshold for the onset of DNA replication. Nature 414: 514-521.
Accurate quantitation of protein expression and site-specific phosphorylation. Y Oda, K Huang, F R Cross, D Cowburn, B T Chait, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 96Oda Y, Huang K, Cross FR, Cowburn D, Chait BT (1999) Accurate quantitation of protein expression and site-specific phosphorylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci, USA 96: 6591-6596.
Distinct regions of the Swi5 and Ace2 transcription factors are required for specific gene activation. H Mcbride, Y Yu, D Stillmain, J Biol Chem. 274McBride H, Yu Y, Stillmain D (1999) Distinct regions of the Swi5 and Ace2 transcription factors are required for specific gene activation. J Biol Chem 274: 21029-21036.
Interaction between yeast Cdc6 protein and B-type cyclin/Cdc28 kinases. S Elasser, F Lou, B Wang, J Campbell, A Jong, Mol Biol Cell. 7Elasser S, Lou F, Wang B, Campbell J, Jong A (1996) Interaction between yeast Cdc6 protein and B-type cyclin/Cdc28 kinases. Mol Biol Cell 7: 1723-1735.
Cyclin-dependent kinases prevent DNA rereplication through multiple mechanisms. V Q Nguyen, C Co, J Li, Nature. 411Nguyen VQ, Co C, Li J (2001) Cyclin-dependent kinases prevent DNA re- replication through multiple mechanisms. Nature 411: 1068-1073.
S-Cdk-dependent phosphorylation of Sld2 essential fo chromosomal DNA replication in budding yeast. H Masumoto, S Muramatsu, Y Kamimura, H Araki, Nature. 415Masumoto H, Muramatsu S, Kamimura Y, Araki H (2002) S-Cdk-dependent phosphorylation of Sld2 essential fo chromosomal DNA replication in budding yeast. Nature 415: 651-655.
Regulation of transcription at the Saccharomyces cerevisiae start transition by Stb1, a Swi6-binding protein. Y Ho, M Costanzo, L Moore, R Kobayashi, B Andrews, Mol Biol Cell. 19Ho Y, Costanzo M, Moore L, Kobayashi R, Andrews B (1999) Regulation of transcription at the Saccharomyces cerevisiae start transition by Stb1, a Swi6- binding protein. Mol Biol Cell 19: 5267-5278.
Cell cycle-and Cln2-Cdc2p-dependent phosphroylation of the Yeast Ste20p protein kinase. C Wu, T Leeuw, E Leberer, D Thomas, M Whiteway, J Biol Chem. 273Wu C, Leeuw T, Leberer E, Thomas D, Whiteway M (1998) Cell cycle-and Cln2-Cdc2p-dependent phosphroylation of the Yeast Ste20p protein kinase. J Biol Chem 273: 28107-28115.
Targets of the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk1. J A Ubersax, E L Woodbury, P N Quang, M Paraz, J D Blethrow, Nature. 425Ubersax JA, Woodbury EL, Quang PN, Paraz M, Blethrow JD, et al. (2003) Targets of the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk1. Nature 425: 859-864.
Targeted proteomic study of the Cyclin-Cdk module. V Archambault, E J Chang, J Db, F R Cross, B T Chait, Mol Cell. 14Archambault V, Chang EJ, J DB, Cross FR, Chait BT, et al. (2004) Targeted proteomic study of the Cyclin-Cdk module. Mol Cell 14: 699-711.
Phosphorylation of sic1, a cyclin-dependent kianse (Cdk) inhibitor, by Cdk including Pho85 kinase is required for its prompt degradation. M Nishizawa, M Kawasumi, M Fujino, A T-E, Mol Biol Cell. 9Nishizawa M, Kawasumi M, Fujino M, A T-e (1998) Phosphorylation of sic1, a cyclin-dependent kianse (Cdk) inhibitor, by Cdk including Pho85 kinase is required for its prompt degradation. Mol Biol Cell 9: 2393-2405.
The role of Thr160 phosphorylation of Cdk2 in substrate recognition. J Holmes, M Solomon, Eur J Biochem. 268Holmes J, Solomon M (2001) The role of Thr160 phosphorylation of Cdk2 in substrate recognition. Eur J Biochem 268: 4647-4652.
Overlapping and distinct roles of the duplicated yeast transcription factors Ace2p and Swi5p. M Doolin, A Johnson, L Johnson, G Butler, Mol Microbiol. 40Doolin M, Johnson A, Johnson L, Butler G (2001) Overlapping and distinct roles of the duplicated yeast transcription factors Ace2p and Swi5p. Mol Microbiol 40: 422-432.
Cyclin-dependent kinases prevent DNA rereplication through multiple mechanisms. V Q Nguyen, C Co, J J Li, Nature. 411Nguyen VQ, Co C, Li JJ (2001) Cyclin-dependent kinases prevent DNA re- replication through multiple mechanisms. Nature 411: 1068-1073.
Recruitment of Thr 319-phosphorylated Ndd1p to the FHA domain of Fkh2p requires Clb kinase activity: a mechanism for CLB cluster gene activation. D Reynolds, B Shi, C Mcclean, F Katsis, B Kemp, Genes Dev. 17Reynolds D, Shi B, McClean C, Katsis F, Kemp B, et al. (2003) Recruitment of Thr 319-phosphorylated Ndd1p to the FHA domain of Fkh2p requires Clb kinase activity: a mechanism for CLB cluster gene activation. Genes Dev 17: 1789-1802.
Phosphorylation of the mitotic regulator Pds1/ securin by Cdc28 is required for efficient nuclear localization of Esp1/separase. R Agarwal, O Cohen-Fix, Genes Dev. 16Agarwal R, Cohen-Fix O (2002) Phosphorylation of the mitotic regulator Pds1/ securin by Cdc28 is required for efficient nuclear localization of Esp1/separase. Genes Dev 16: 1371-1382.
Detection of secreted peptides by using hypothesis-driven multistage mass spectrometry. M Kalkum, G J Lyon, B T Chait, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 100Kalkum M, Lyon GJ, Chait BT (2003) Detection of secreted peptides by using hypothesis-driven multistage mass spectrometry. Proc Natl Acad Sci, USA 100: 2795-27800.
Protein structure prediction in genomics. D Jones, Brief Bioinform. 2Jones D (2001) Protein structure prediction in genomics. Brief Bioinform 2: 111-125.
Tools for comparative protein structure modeling and analysis. N Eswar, B John, N Mirkovic, A Fiser, V Ilyin, Nucleic Acids Res. 31Eswar N, John B, Mirkovic N, Fiser A, Ilyin V, et al. (2003) Tools for comparative protein structure modeling and analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 31: 3375-3380.
Phosphorylation by Cdc28 activates the Cdc20-dependent activity of the anaphase promoting complex. A Rudner, A Murray, J Cell Biol. 149Rudner A, Murray A (2000) Phosphorylation by Cdc28 activates the Cdc20- dependent activity of the anaphase promoting complex. J Cell Biol 149: 1377-1390.
Identification and characterization of protein subcomplexes in yeast. J Hollunder, A Beyer, T Wilhelm, Proteomics. 5Hollunder J, Beyer A, Wilhelm T (2005) Identification and characterization of protein subcomplexes in yeast. Proteomics 5: 2082-2089.
Systematic identification of protein complexes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by mass spectrometry. Ho, Nature. 415Ho Y al. e (2002) Systematic identification of protein complexes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by mass spectrometry. Nature 415: 180-183.
Functional organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein complexes. Gavin, Nature. 415Gavin A al. e (2002) Functional organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein complexes. Nature 415: 141-147.
Phosphate groups as substrate determinants for casein kinase I action. H Flotow, P R Graves, A Wang, C J Fiol, R W Roeske, J Biol Chem. 265Flotow H, Graves PR, Wang A, Fiol CJ, Roeske RW, et al. (1990) Phosphate groups as substrate determinants for casein kinase I action. J Biol Chem 265: 14264-14269.
Role of acidic residues as substrate determinants for casein kinase I. H Flotow, P J Roach, J Biol Chem. 266Flotow H, Roach PJ (1991) Role of acidic residues as substrate determinants for casein kinase I. J Biol Chem 266: 3724-3727.
Formation of protein kinase recognition sites by covalent modification of the substrate. Molecular mechanism for the synergistic action of casein kinase II and glycogen synthase kinase 3. C J Fiol, A Marenholz, Y Wang, R Roeske, P J Roach, J Biol Chem. 262Fiol CJ, Marenholz A, Wang Y, Roeske R, Roach PJ (1987) Formation of protein kinase recognition sites by covalent modification of the substrate. Molecular mechanism for the synergistic action of casein kinase II and glycogen synthase kinase 3. J Biol Chem 262: 14042-14048.
A Common Phosphate Binding Site Explains the Unique Substrate Specificity of GSK3 and Its Inactivation by Phosphorylation. S Frame, P Cohen, R Biondi, Mol Cell. 7Frame S, Cohen P, Biondi R (2001) A Common Phosphate Binding Site Explains the Unique Substrate Specificity of GSK3 and Its Inactivation by Phosphorylation. Mol Cell 7: 1321-1327.
Mechanistic Insights into Sky1p, a Yeast Homologue of the Mammalian SR Protein Kinases. B Aubol, B Nolen, D Vu, G Gourisankar, J Adams, Biochemistry. 41Aubol B, Nolen B, Vu D, Gourisankar G, Adams J (2002) Mechanistic Insights into Sky1p, a Yeast Homologue of the Mammalian SR Protein Kinases. Biochemistry 41: 10002-10009.
Mass spectrometric and kinetic analysis of ASF/SF2 phosphorylation by SRPK1 and Clk/Sty. A Velazquez-Dones, J Hagopian, C Ma, X Zhong, H Zhou, J Biol Chem. 28041761Velazquez-Dones A, Hagopian J, Ma C, Zhong X, Zhou H, et al. (2005) Mass spectrometric and kinetic analysis of ASF/SF2 phosphorylation by SRPK1 and Clk/Sty. J Biol Chem 280: 41761.
Multiple sequence alignment with the Clustal series of programs. C Ramu, H Sugawar, T Koike, R Lopez, T Gibson, Nucleic Acids Res. 31Ramu C, Sugawar H, Koike T, Lopez R, Gibson T, et al. (2003) Multiple sequence alignment with the Clustal series of programs. Nucleic Acids Res 31: 3497-3500.


614128:CyclinPred: A SVM-Based Method for Predicting Cyclin Protein Sequences


Introduction

Cyclins were first identified in early 1980s in the eggs of marine invertebrates [1,2]. Subsequently, cyclins have been discovered in many organisms [3,4]. Cyclins bind and activate members of the Cdk protein family to regulate the cell cycle. The periodicity of cyclin concentrations during the cell cycle leads to periodic oscillations in Cdk activity that governs the cell cycle control system. Different cyclin-Cdk complexes are activated at different points during the cell cycle [5][6][7][8]. Cyclins have been classified into four general classes based on function and timing of activity namely, G1, G1/S, S and M cyclins. In most species, diverse multiple forms have been discovered, hence the cyclins were further classified on the basis of amino acid sequence comparisons, such as G1:C, D, E and G2:A, B cyclins and several other classes [9]. Cyclin homologues have also been found in various viruses; for example Herpesvirus saimiri and Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus [10].
Cyclin family proteins are 30 to 65 kDa in size, sharing considerable sequence heterogeneity but share some common structural motifs known as 'cyclin fold'. However, the conserved 'cyclin fold' is also found in general transcription factors (for example TFIIB) and tumor suppressor retinoblastoma protein [11]. Multiple alignments of the amino acid sequences of cyclins have identified a region of similarity, extending around 100 amino acids, termed as cyclin box [12,13]. The conserved region has been termed as a cyclin related domain using Hidden Markov models by Pfam database [14] and a cyclin motif in PROSITE database [15]. However, the cyclin signatures are completely absent in several annotated cyclin sequences. Some members of G2/mitotic-specific and cyclin T family cyclins neither possess PROSITE motif nor Pfam cyclin domains, as discussed later in the dataset section. New cyclin genes and proteins have been characterized using various strategies for example using BLAST to identify cyclins in Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogastor and Homo sapiens [16], and Hidden Markov Models (HMM) based methods in Arabidopsis genome [17]. In general, simple BLAST or advanced PSI-BLAST (Position Specific Iterated BLAST, [18]) is used as a first choice for functional annotation of predicted proteins or proteins of unknown function. The choice of similarity based approaches is reasonable only if query proteins are similar to database sequences or profile generated from them. This limitation is easily overcome by machine learning techniques like Support Vector Machine (SVM).
SVM is a supervised learning algorithm, which has been found to be useful in recognition and discrimination of hidden patterns in complex datasets [19]. Prediction methods based on SVM have been successfully exploited in many research problems involving complex, sequence or biological datasets [20][21][22], like remote protein similarity detection [23], DNA methylation status [24], protein domains [25] and multiclass cancer diagnosis [26]. SVMs learn from a training data sample consisting of both positive as well as negative examples of a classification problem along with their features. The SVMs numerically finds the distinguishing features of a particular class which may be used for classification. In short, SVMs initially map input data (in terms of negative and positive class input vectors) into a high dimensional feature space using a kernel function [27][28][29]. The input or feature vectors in the feature space are then classified linearly by a numerically optimized hyper plane, separating the two classes [30,31]. The hyper plane depends only on a subset of training examples, called Support Vectors (SVs).
In context to the current study, SVMs learn the features specific to the cyclin sequences and generate support vectors decisive for possible classification of any given sequence as cyclin. For the cyclin classification problem, a feature vector (x i ) could represent the Amino Acid Compositions (AAC), Di-Peptide Compositions (DPC) of a protein sequence, Secondary Structure Composition (SSC) or any other training feature. AAC gives a fixed input pattern length of 20 whereas DPC gives a pattern of length 400 [32]. The fixed length pattern of training features is a basic requirement of SVM training input. DPC features are better than AAC features since it provides both the fractional composition of each amino acid as well as their local order in the protein sequence. Both the composition features were used as training inputs to classify cyclin sequences from non-cyclin sequences using SVM. Apart from the composition features, we also used the feature vectors of the secondary structure information and PSSM profile of the training sequences, obtained from PSIPRED (Protein Structure Prediction Server [33]) and PSI-BLAST analysis respectively [18]. We used SVM light package [34,35] for implementation of the SVM training for classification of sequences.
The optimized classifier was trained with different properties of a non redundant dataset consisting of 68 cyclin (positive dataset) and 72 non cyclin (negative dataset) sequences (for details, see the supporting information files). Different properties of sequences like amino acid composition and dipeptide composition, and PSI-BLAST results were used for training and optimization of the classifiers. Optimization of different classifiers was performed using Leave-One-Out (LOO) cross validation (CV) technique or jackknife test, Self-consistency and Holdout tests. The biasness of selected classifiers was checked by calculating prediction efficiency for an independent dataset sequences not used in the training as well as annotated sequences of Arabidopsis thaliana. Pfam and PROSITE search of the training dataset cyclin sequences revealed that cyclin associated domains and motifs are not present in all the cyclin sequences. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was also performed for the training variables to find out the variables important for distinguishing cyclins from non cyclin sequences.

Results


Performance of similarity based search (PSI-BLAST)

Three iterations of PSI-BLAST were carried out at E value 0.001. The performance of PSI-BLAST was evaluated using jackknife cross validation method (identical to jackknife CV test used for the evaluation of SVM models), where each sequence in the training dataset was used as a BLAST query sequence and remaining sequences were used as BLAST database. Thus, in the process of jackknife test, each protein sequence is used as a test sequence, and for other rounds; the sequence is included in the training dataset. In PSI-BLAST output, it was observed that out of 68 cyclin proteins, no significant hits were obtained for 8 proteins, thereby resulting in overall accuracy of 88.2%. This implies that similarity-based search methods alone may not be the best choice for functional annotation of proteins. Therefore, we decided to explore methods based on other protein features for the prediction of cyclin proteins.
Preference of amino acids in cyclins and non-cyclins AAC (Amino Acid Composition) analyses of cyclin and noncyclin protein training sequences (Figure 1) reveal differential amino acid propensities in cyclins and non-cyclin sequences, especially with respect to that of Leu, Gly, Ala, Val, Lys and Asn. The percentage composition of Leu, Ala and Val is higher in cyclin protein sequences whereas the percentage composition of Gly, Lys and Asn is higher in non-cyclin sequences used in the training. AACs of other amino acids were not significantly different in cyclin and non-cyclin protein sequences. It was expected from the observations that the AAC information alone was not enough to classify the cyclins. Hence, we used other sequence features like DPC (Di-Peptide Compositions), SSC (Secondary Structure Composition) and PSSM in conjunction with AAC to train different SVMs based on different kernels.

Performance of standalone SVM models

We performed training-testing cycles recursively to develop SVM models based on different features as well as combination of all the features (referred to as hybrids) (Table 1). Initially, we performed jackknife test (LOO CV) of AAC, DPC and PSSM by The plot reveals the differential amino acid propensities in cyclins and non-cyclin sequences, especially with respect to that of Leu, Gly, Ala, Val, Lys and Asn. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002605.g001 optimization with all the three kernels, namely: linear, polynomial and RBF (Radial Basis Function).
Composition based models. We found that for the SVM models based on AAC features, the linear and polynomial kernels yielded similar accuracies (83.28% and 83.57%, respectively). Optimizing the parameters with RBF kernel yielded an accuracy of 83.57% which is comparable to that of the other two kernels (Table 1). Hence, AAC based SVMs trained with different kernels have similar accuracies. To check whether these accuracies are due to artifact of the training dataset, we generated another sets of non-cyclin sequences belonging to few non-cyclin families (for example regulatory proteins and membrane bound proteins etc.) and used them as non-cyclin dataset for training AAC based SVM classifier: we found that each classifier had comparable specificity and sensitivity values (results not shown here). For DPC feature based model, the training classifiers based on linear and polynomial kernels yielded accuracies of 83.74% and 81.43% respectively. However, the RBF kernel yielded a higher accuracy of 85.13% (for c = 12, C = 30). Accuracy of SSC based SVM classifier was 80.71%, which is less as compared to that of the AAC and DPC based SVM classifiers.
PSSM profile based classifier model. The optimization with linear and polynomial kernels for PSSM profile based classifier model resulted in ,91% accuracy for both the kernels. However, SVM optimized with RBF kernel augmented the accuracy to 92.14% (for c = 1 and C = 32.5), which was the best performance amongst the classifiers based on individual features. It had a sensitivity of 92.64% and specificity of 91.66% with MCC of 0.842. The comparison of results obtained with all the four features; clearly demonstrate that the best classification efficiency was achieved by the PSSM based model which incorporates the information about residue composition, position specific substitutions and evolutionarily conserved residues in the protein sequences. Also, the efficiency of RBF kernel based discrimination between cyclins and non-cyclins as compared to other kernels for AAC, DPC and PSSM and ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) plot study ( Figure 2B) suggested that RBF kernel is more efficient and appropriate for the cyclin training dataset and hence we used the RBF kernel for evaluation of all the SVM classifiers.

Performance of hybrid-SVM classifier models

In our efforts to further improve the prediction accuracy, we developed and evaluated eight hybrid SVM classifier models (hybrid-1 to hybrid-8), results of which are summarized in the Table 1.
Hybrid models based on two features. The first hybrid-SVM model (hybrid-1) was developed using AAC and DPC features of the training dataset sequences. The prediction accuracy of hybrid- 1 model was 81.42% with sensitivity of 82.35% and specificity of 80.55%, which was not better than that of standalone AAC and DPC based SVM models. The hybrids-2 and 3 were based on secondary structure predictions, amino acid and dipeptide compositions. We found that hybrid-2 has greater accuracy as compared to that of hybrid-3 (85.71% and 81.42%, respectively); also better than the accuracy of individual SSC or AAC based SVM models however, comparable to the individual DPC based model. Further, when the training was done using features from both AAC and PSSM (hybrid-4) or DPC and PSSM (hybrid-5), the accuracy increased to 91.42%, as compared to hybrids-1 to 3. However, amongst the hybrid-classifier models based on two features (hybrid:1-6), the best accuracy of 92.14% was achieved by combining the SSC and PSSM pattern information in hybrid-6 classifier, with a sensitivity of 92.64% and specificity of 91.66%. This SVM model has a MCC value of 0.842, highest amongst the hybrid-SVM classifier models.
Hybrid models based on more than two features. Considering the importance of conserved secondary structures in cyclins, we decided to use SSC in conjunction with the training features of the best hybrid-classifier developed till this stage other than hybrid-6 (i.e. hybrid-5 based on PSSM and DPC features). Hence, we developed another hybrid model using the information from PSSM, DPC and SSC features (hybrid-7), with a pattern length of 860 features. Unexpectedly, the accuracy of this hybrid model was 90.01% (c = 2 and C = 10), lower than the accuracies of hybrid-5 (PSSM+DPC = 91.42%) and hybrid-6 (PSSM+SSC = 92.14%) classifier models. Another hybrid model of PSSM, DPC and AAC (hybrid-8) was developed with which we were able to achieve an accuracy of 91.42%, similar to that of hybrid-4 and 5. Thus, the accuracy achieved by hybrid-6 and PSSM based model were the best amongst all the hybrids and standalone models, further supported by the highest MCC of these models.

Self-consistency and holdout validation tests

We carried out self-consistency tests of the best models namely: PSSM, hybrid-6 and hybrid-8 to evaluate their learning capability. We used two different modes to carry out the self-consistency test (as described in the methods). Mode-2 self-consistency test gave an accuracy of 100% and a MCC of 1 (with different c values of RBF kernel) whereas mode-1 showed different accuracies for respective models (Table 1). It is interesting to note from mode 1 that PSSM based model and hybrid-6 have comparable performances (,98% accuracy) and better than hybrid-8 (,95% accuracy). A high accuracy and MCC from self-consistency method implies that SVM has inherited the intrinsic correlation between feature vectors and the classification searched for.
Further, the performance of PSSM based model and hybrid-6 (PSSM+SSC) were assessed by holdout tests. The holdout test results are highly convincing in terms of accuracies and MCCs (,0.8 for PSSM model and ,0.7 for hybrid-6). The tests results have ruled out any skewness, biasness or variance in the results due to random splitting of the dataset. Also, as holdout tests simulate the random/blind test performance for a large dataset, the results obtained here reflect a strong discriminative power of the classifier.

Comparison of classifier's performance with random prediction and F1 statistics

Upon comparing the prediction reliability with that of random prediction (Table 2), it was clearly observed that normalized prediction accuracy S, in models trained with features like AAC (67.12%) or DPC (69.98%) or even SSC (61.31%), were not better than that of hybrids (.80% except hybrids 1-3) or highly specialized feature like PSSM (84.27%). The two best models obtained from this comparative study were PSSM based model and hybrid model (hybrid-6, S = 84.27%). Again, F1 statistics of both the models were similar (0.851) and better than that of others. It suggests that precision and recall capacity of the models are good enough to classify the protein classes.

ROC plot

For each SVM model, threshold-independent performance was measured by plotting ROC curve between TP rate (sensitivity) and FP rate (1-specificity) values. ROC indicates the performance of all SVM models optimized with best parameters. Figure 2A shows the details of AUC (Area Under Curve). The AUC for hybrid-6 and PSSM model is 96.8% which is again the highest amongst all AUCs of the other models. From the Figure 2B, area under curve of simpler feature like AAC based SVM model, standardized with RBF kernel is 89.4%, similar to linear and polynomial kernels whereas more advanced features like DPC and PSSM has a better AUC when optimized with RBF kernel as compared to other two kernels. For example, AUC of DPC based model was 90% (RBF) as compared to 84% (linear) and 89% (polynomial). This clearly demonstrates that RBF kernel has much better ability in distinguishing cyclin from non-cyclin sequences.

Performance on independent dataset

To evaluate the unbiased performance of the PSSM based and hybrid-6 based SVM classifiers, an independent / blind-test evaluation was carried out on the test set of 54 PROSITE falsenegatives (described in the methods). The prediction accuracy of the PSSM classifier was found to be 98.15% as compared to that of hybrid-6 (92.58%). The available cyclin HMM profile (Pfam database) predicts cyclin domain for 50 sequences of this test set; therefore it failed to predict 4 sequences. The PSSM based SVM model was able to predict 3 out of 4 sequences, apart from correctly predicting all other 50; making a total of 53 correct predictions out of 54. However, the hybrid-6 classifier was able to predict 50 sequences, similar to Pfam HMM profile prediction. Therefore, the blind-test performance clearly established that the PSSM based SVM classifier has better prediction capacity with minimum error as false positives/negatives. Also, using the PSSM based SVM classifier, we were also able to predict the 30 newly identified cyclins in A. thaliana genome that were predicted earlier by a HMM based method developed by Vandepoele et al. [17]. In addition to these predicted proteins, with high SVM score cutoffs -34 additional sequences were predicted as cyclins, for which no annotations are available so far. It is important to mention here that 25% of the predicted proteins in the A. thaliana genome, 8073 protein sequences, are yet poorly annotated and mostly described as 'unknowns'. However, an elaborative analysis and supporting evidences may be needed from case to case before any significant remarks can be made regarding these predicted cyclins.
Feature analysis using PCA PCA was carried out to identify important elements from AAC, DPC and PSSM features that are capable of distinguishing cyclin from non-cyclin sequences. The PCA plots between PC1 and PC2 for each sequence feature was studied ( Figure 3). From the figure, it is evident that the clustering of positive and negative examples of the training set and their mutual segregation in two dimensional space gradually increased as we moved from the model based on AAC (simplest of all features used) to a more advanced PSSM feature based model. A brief description of each of the feature is described below.
Amino acid composition. The component loadings plot for first two principal components (PCs) describing amino acid frequencies ( Figure 3A) revealed the following facts:-PC1  Figure 3B). Similar results were observed when PCA was performed for each of the randomly splitted equal halves of the dataset; consisting of approximately same number of cyclin and non-cyclin sequences of AAC training dataset (identical to the holdout evaluation method in SVM) (data not shown here).
These findings are in agreement with the observed prevalence of amino acids in cyclins and non-cyclins ( Figure 1) which indicates Ala and Leu in cyclins and Asn and Lys in non-cyclins give major contributions to first three principal components. This analysis offers some hints about distinguishing determinants in AAC model. However, the importance of Gly residue needs a closer look as it was not very prevalent distinguishing element in PC loadings plot though its sequence composition is substantially different between cyclin and non-cyclin sequences.
Dipeptide composition. Component loadings for the first three principal components explain only 21% of the variability of the dataset ( Figure 3C). The high amino acid composition of Asn is clearly reflected in dipeptide composition too and it is principally contributing to PC1 (loading 20.489). In fact, most of the dipeptide compositions were following the observed trend of prevalence of amino acid composition. For example, dipeptides of Ala with Ala, Leu, Arg, and Ser have higher weightage towards PC1, correlating with that of the cyclin sequences. However, Ser-Ser, Ser-Ala, Ser-Asn dipeptides and their vice-versa were predominantly correlating with PC2 and non-cyclin proteins in majority. Although, a very strong correlation of training dataset examples and its dipeptides seems to be present, but as compared to PCA of AAC, a better partitioning of feature (dipeptides) among positive and negative examples of the training dataset was observed.
PSSM profile. The principal component loadings of PSSM profile reveal that PC1 is capable of gathering 27.7% of total variance of the dataset ( Figure 3D). In totality, first three components grasped upto 58% of the variance with individual variances of 18% and 12% for PC2 and PC3 respectively. Conservative substitution of amino acids is a general phenomenon in protein sequences and was also observed in the scatter plot like Ala by Ala, Lys by Lys, Arg by Lys or Glu by Asp. The Ser and Asn substitutions were observed to be clustered more cohesively as compared to clustered distribution of Ala, Arg, Ile in cyclins and Lys and Glu in non-cyclins. Some of the outliers in the plot were observed to be unusual substitutions such as Asn by His, Asn by Thr and Lys by Gln, Glu by Ser which might be due to dominance of certain amino acids specific to the certain cyclin sub-classes under study.

Implementation of best classifier as CyclinPred web server

The best classifiers developed in the current study are publicly available at ''http://bioinfo.icgeb.res.in/cyclinpred'' The home page of the webserver is simple and designed using HTML and PHP (Figure 4) which accepts a protein sequence inputs in FASTA format. One may choose either of the given prediction strategies on the server: PSSM profile based model (the best model as default model), Hybrid model (PSSM+SSC) and Consensus method (a sequence will be predicted as cyclin only if both hybrid and PSSM models predict the sequence as cyclin). To check the time and memory constraints of running predictions on the server (CyclinPred is currently hosted on a AMD 852 4 processor server), we submitted two test sequences: the shortest cyclin sequence in the training dataset and the longest amino acid sequence (a titin protein sequence) in the SwissProt (release 55.2). The server returned the results were in 0.47 and 11.8 seconds respectively for the sequences. In a similar test run, complete results for all A. thaliana proteins were returned in 5 minutes and 42 seconds. The results reflect that the prediction method is not too computational intensive.

Discussion

Recently, artificial intelligence based techniques like SVM have been used in solving problems in computational biology -including extraction of complex patterns in biological sequence databases and its use in training and classification using SVMs. Although the major limitation of SVM based methods is the requirement of fixed-length input patterns, however it is completely independent of sequence similarity. This makes SVM based methods a unique tool for analyzing proteins with very low sequence similarity. Here, we have implemented a SVM kernel-based method to develop a robust method for identification of cyclins.
Initially, the fixed length pattern of 20 was used based upon amino acid composition for the classification of proteins. This feature was earlier used to develop a method for subcellular localization of proteins [36,37]. However, this feature provides no information about the local order of amino acids in the protein. This deficit was overcome by using dipeptide composition of amino acids giving a length of 400 [38]. The performance tuning and efficiency of the models based upon these features; individually, has been evaluated using jackknife CV, selfconsistency and holdout methods. An accuracy of 83.57% and 85.13% with RBF kernel was achieved by jackknife test for classifiers based on AAC and DPC features, respectively. Such values are impressively high in context of differentiating cyclins from non-cyclins. The protocol also demonstrates that it doesn't rely upon remote sequence homology for cyclin prediction. Since, the cyclin box of cyclins contains several conserved alpha helices and extended beta sheets joined by short turns [13], this secondary structure information is a valuable feature to provide global information in conjunction with amino acid and amino acid pairs compositions. However, the SVM model trained with PSIPRED SSC features was found to have an accuracy of 80.71% (Table 1), lower than other models. The precise conformation of an amino acid also depends, along with other factors, on factors such as the neighboring residues, physico-chemical nature, and local folding stress. The preference of an amino acid for each of the three secondary structures (helix, sheet and coil) can provide us more elaborative features of the structure of a protein. Such feature vectors will encompass more valuable information as compared to mere percentage of secondary structures. However the boundaries (and sequence lengths) of secondary structure patterns are not conserved, hence it is difficult to convert this information into feature patterns of fixed length suitable for training SVMs. This suggests that structural information alone may not be sufficient enough to distinguish cyclins from non-cyclins. This is also due to sharing of some common structural folds by cyclins and non-cyclin proteins, as is evident in the case of TFIIB and retinoblastoma proteins. However, remarkable accuracy of 92.14% was achieved with PSSM based SVM model. The embedded information of amino acids composition, their position-specific conservation and evolutionary relationship between different cyclins in the generated PSSM model makes it a robust model for achieving higher accuracy with strict maintenance at training-error level.
With a view to further enhance the prediction accuracy; we developed SVM classifiers trained with combinations of different features to generate hybrid models. We used amino acid, dipeptide, secondary structure composition and PSSM profile for generating the hybrid models. Amongst all the hybrid models developed, the SVM hybrid-6 model trained with secondary structure composition and PSSM profile optimized with RBF kernel, achieving the competing prediction accuracy with that of PSSM based model of 92.14% with sensitivity and specificity of 92.64% and 91.66%, respectively. Also, the AUC obtained from ROC curve was best for PSSM model and hybrid-6 model with 96.8%. It reflects that highly comprehensive but condensed and meaningful information is required to attain such high prediction accuracy.
However, the prediction accuracy on independent dataset; representing a true unknown prediction showed that PSSM based model was able to predict 53 out of 54 sequences (as compared to 50 by hybrid-6 and HMM profiles of Pfam database). Overall, PSSM based model was able to achieve an accuracy of 98.5% as compared to 95% by hybrid-6.
Thus, these results not only confirmed that optimized SVM is able to learn crucial features responsible for the accurate classification but also, it helps us to understand that prediction accuracy can be increased by providing more comprehensive information of a protein sequence. Moreover, our studies reiterate that biological patterns generally follow non-linear equations/functions which may not be easily predictable by conventional computational methods. This is fact is well exemplified by the classification task undertaken in our study in which we found that the models optimized with linear kernel functions are less accurate as compared to those trained with non-linear functions. For example, with linear kernel, the accuracy achieved in case of DPC based model was 81.43% as against 85.13% with RBF kernel. Similarly, PSSM based model achieved 92.14% accuracy when optimized with RBF kernel as compared to ,91% with linear kernel.
The reason behind better performance of the model developed by us is mainly because we have used a statistical learning method which generates prediction models by learning from large complex datasets, also taking care of over-fitting problem. In most of the cases, a small fraction of total examples in the training dataset were used to gather all the information required for generating the classification model, thus the original dataset is filtered to make more informative and representative dataset in terms of Support Vectors (SVs) of representative sequences. In the study, the number of SVs finally chosen by SVM for training (PSSM and hybrid-6 based models) are 53 and 77 (out of 140 training sequences) which is just 38% and 55% of the total dataset, respectively. In the hybrid-6 model, training with information from both -the PSSM and secondary structure information as input to the classifier enhances both the prediction accuracy and reliability of the models generated.
Furthermore, the PCA analysis of the features has proven that the features which encapsulate comprehensive information about sequences help better segregation of training examples and enhances their correlation with the features under study. This is exemplified by the case of PSSM based model as compared to other feature based models.
The advantage with the present prediction method lies in the fact that classifier is independent of any sequence or structural similarity to any known proteins. The absolute inheritance of cyclin domains or motifs in proteins is not a mandatory object for prediction. The method can even predict those cyclins which have high sequence variability like cyclin M, T or some G2-specific cyclins. The results obtained from current implementation of features are highly encouraging. In future, more cyclin specific features may be included for enhancing the efficiency of the SVM model and subfamily specific classifiers may be developed. To develop subfamily-specific SVM classifiers, sufficient number of sequences representing each subfamily will be required. Currently, the number of cyclin sequences from each subfamily, is too low for developing subfamily-specific classifiers. Almost all the subfamilies have less than or equal to five sequences per group in the training dataset. Only cyclin B subfamily is represented by more than 30 sequences (Table S1, also see Table S2 for list of organisms and corresponding cyclin sequences in the training set). However, with the increase in the number of annotated cyclins in future, representing each subfamily, it should be possible to develop subfamily-specific SVM classifiers.

Materials and Methods


Data Source and Generation of Non Redundant Training Datasets

Classification efficiency of a SVM model depends a great deal on the quality of dataset used in training. The cyclin and noncyclin sequences used as training dataset in the present work were obtained from different sources of manually curated and annotated sequence databases, including SwissProt [39], RefSeq [40] and other organism specific databases. Protein sequences annotated as 'hypothetical', 'truncated', 'fragmented' or 'partial' were excluded from the dataset. It is known that both transcription factor IIB and retinoblastoma proteins contain the cyclin associated conserved cyclin-box fold [11] and hence these proteins were included in the negative dataset. The manual filtering yielded a dataset of full-length and annotated cyclin and non-cyclin protein sequences.
Subsequently, the redundancy in the dataset was brought down to 30 percent using PISCES algorithm [41]. This implies that no two sequences in the training dataset are more than 30 percent identical to each other. After scaling down the redundancy, the final dataset used for training consists of 68 cyclin (Dataset S1) and 72 non-cyclin (Dataset S2) sequences. These sequences were used to generate features for the SVM training-testing protocol used in the study (available at the CyclinPred server). The percentage identity of most of the training dataset cyclin sequences lie between 15-25% (there is a pair which is 100% non-similar) whereas amongst non-cyclins most of the sequences are 15-20% similar. The identity of cyclin and non-cyclin sequences in the training dataset varies between 16-20%. The dataset includes cyclins from all cyclin subfamilies (20 different subfamilies); however the number of sequences representing each family was reduced due to sequence redundancy reduction. The highest score between most divergent cyclin sequence, Q9DEA3|PCNA_CHICK and any non-cyclin sequence is 18.9% identity with a sequence of transcription initiation factor IIB from Guillardia theta (closest non cyclin sequence). The lowest score is 0.8% identity with a Cytochrome b protein from Dictyostelium discoideum.

Dataset for Blind-test performance

It has been reported that the performance of N-fold CV is not completely unbiased [21]. In order to assess the unbiased performance of our final SVM classifier, we evaluated its performance on a dataset not used in the training or testing. For this, we used a dataset of 61 false negative sequences from PROSITE database (cyclin sequences which do not have the cyclin PROSITE motif PS00292). Positive dataset training sequences common to these sequences were excluded; leading to an independent dataset of 54 cyclin sequences (Dataset S3). The accuracy, thus obtained reflects the true blind predictions for the test set. The performance of the best classifiers was also compared with available cyclin domain HMM profiles from the Pfam database (cyclin_N: PF00134, cyclin_C: PF02984 and cyclin: PF086 13).

Assessment of training dataset for the presence of cyclin domain and motif

We performed pfscan search to look for PROSITE cyclin motifs in the 68 positive dataset sequences used in the SVM training. The cyclin motifs were found in only 35 out of the 68 cyclin sequences. We also found that 61 protein sequences had one of the cyclin associated Pfam domains. Comparisons of these annotated cyclin sequences showed that 6 proteins neither contain the Pfam cyclin domains nor the PROSITE cyclin motifs. This emphasizes the fact that all the known annotated cyclins are not represented by Pfam domain families and/or PROSITE signatures.

SVM algorithm and problem formulation

SVM light , an implementation of Support Vector Machines (SVMs) in C language was used for the current study. The SVM light (http://svmlight.joachims.org/) allows optimization of SVM models by changing a number of parameters, including types of kernels (linear, polynomial, radial basis function or sigmoid) to perform the classification task. It is similar to solving a quadratic optimization problem (QP) and the decision function can be solved as
where xi J R (real number) is the pattern used for the classification and y i is the corresponding target value, which is +1 for cyclins and 21 for non-cyclins. a i is the value provided by QP. The separating hyperplane generated by SVM model is given by
Where, w is a vector normal to the hyperplane and b is a parameter that minimizes IwI 2 and satisfies the following conditions:
w : x i zb §z1 for y i~z 1, positive class ð3Þ
w : x i zbƒ{1 for y i~{ 1, negative class ð4Þ

Evaluation Methods

The entire dataset of 'N' number of sequences was divided into training and testing sets for which SVM parameters were optimized by Cross Validation (CV) method. The parameters were optimized by CV over the training set by maximizing the accuracy and minimizing the training error. In the study, we implemented three methods of evaluation to check the performance of classifier models, namely-Leave-One-Out CV (LOO CV) or Jackknife CV test, self consistency and holdout tests.
In the first method, the jackknife test is a CV technique in which one dataset sequence is used as a testing data (for validation of the generated model) while the remaining dataset sequences are used as the training data to develop a model. This is iterated N times till each sequence in the dataset become the testing data exactly once. In each of the iterations, the parameters corresponding to the best accuracy are recorded and then averaged for the final overall evaluation of the model. We also performed self-consistency test in which the entire dataset is used for the training as well as for testing to validate the generated model. This test indicates the confidence level of the model as it inherits the internal knowledge of the training dataset. Self-consistency test was carried out in two modes, differing in the use of kernel parameters. In mode-1, the performances of the models were checked by using the best kernel parameters as evaluated by jackknife CV test performed earlier. In mode-2, the performances of the models were checked by using new kernel parameters to achieve the best accuracy during the selfconsistency tests.
The rationale behind using two modes was that mode-1 would provide the self-learning capability of the model on those parameters which have been obtained from cross-validation with jackknife test as well as this model will be used for prediction purpose whereas mode-2 would provide the self-learning capability of the model on those parameters which have not been involved any cross-validation or partitioning of the dataset and therefore, reflects the consistency of the prediction model.
In the third method of evaluation, namely the holdout test, the dataset is randomly split into two equal halves, with approximately equal numbers of positive and negative dataset sequences. SVM is then trained with one of these subsets with Jackknife CV test to find best parameters. The performance is then evaluated by testing the optimized parameters on the second subset. This test indicates the prediction efficiency of the models for sequences independent of the training.
We also evaluated the performance of the SVM model by the following measures:-

1)

Sensitivity: percentage of cyclin protein sequences that are correctly predicted as cyclins.

2)

Specificity: percentage of non-cyclin protein sequences that are correctly predicted as non-cyclin sequences.

3)

Accuracy: percentage of correct predictions, for cyclins as well as non-cyclin sequences.

4)

Mathew's Correlation Constant (MCC): employed for the optimization of parameters and evaluation of performance [42]. MCC = 1 signifies perfect prediction while MCC = 0 suggests completely random prediction. The above mentioned evaluations may be represented mathematically as given below.
where, True Positive (TP) and True Negative (TN) are correctly predicted cyclin and non-cyclin sequences, respectively. Similarly, False Positive (FP) and False Negative (FN) are wrongly predicted non-cyclin and cyclin protein sequences, respectively.
All the above mentioned measures are threshold-dependent i.e. the prediction performance is evaluated for a fixed SVM cutoff score or threshold. To calculate threshold-independent performance, a Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve was plotted between TP rate (sensitivity) and FP rate (1-specificity) [43]. The Area Under the Curve (AUC) describes inherent tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity and thereby measures the accuracy of the SVM model.
Another important consideration is whether the present prediction method is better than a random prediction. To check the reliability of the method, we first calculated R, an anticipated number of proteins that are correctly classified by random prediction [44]:
Subsequently, we also calculated S, the normalized percentage of correctly predicted samples better than random i.e. the method is independent of the scale of total samples in the dataset and R:
Therefore, value of S = 100% stands for a perfect prediction and S = 0% for a worst prediction. Among all common statistical measures like accuracy, specificity and sensitivity, F1 statistic is a more robust measure as other measures can overstate the performance of the classifier. F1 statistic is a harmonic mean of precision and recall (or between sensitivity and positive predictive value), given by equation 8:
Finally the best SVM model on the basis of accuracy, MCC, S (random prediction), F1 statistic and other statistical measures is validated against the test set not used in the training using the blind test independent datasets.

Calculation of Protein Features

Amino acid composition (AAC). The following equation was used to calculate AAC, where i is any of the 20 amino acids. Dipeptide composition (DPC). The fraction of each dipeptide in the protein was calculated by the following formulae, where j can be any of the 400 dipeptides. Secondary Structure Composition (SSC). Secondary structure is an important feature of cyclins due to its characteristic helical domains assuming helix rich cyclin-folds, containing the cyclin-box [13,45]. Secondary structure prediction was carried out by PSIPRED v2.4 which is a simple and reliable prediction method. The method incorporates two feed-forward neural networks that perform an analysis on the output obtained from PSI-BLAST v2.2.4. PSIPRED predicts secondary structure for each residue and provides a confidence score for three types of secondary structures: helices, b-sheets and coil regions. For each of the amino acids, the scores corresponding to helix, sheet and coils are extracted and averaged respectively, thereby making a matrix of 60 (2063::amino acids6secondary structures). Following equation was used to calculate the features corresponding to secondary structure prediction, F k,jÃ ddition of scores having a secondary structure k for amino acid j Frequency of the amino acid j in the protein
where k can be any of the 3 secondary structures (helix/sheet/coil) and j can be any of the 20 amino acids.

Position

Specific Substitution Matrix (PSSM) profile. This model was designed using PSI-BLAST v2.2.4 output. For each amino acid, PSI-BLAST give 20 substitution scores in the PSSM which provides the evolutionary information about the protein at the level of residue types. Three iterations of PSI-BLAST were carried out at cut-off E-value of 0.001. Each value in the PSSM represents the likelihood of a particular residue substitution at a specific position of a protein class and it was normalized between 0 and 1 using the logistic function as shown in equation 12 [46] g
Where x is the raw value in PSSM profile and g(x) is the normalized value of x. Following this, the normalized matrix is organized into a composition matrix of fixed length pattern of 400 (20620, for each amino acid, there are 20 substitution scores from normalized matrix). Normalization was done for other features also.

Principle Component Analysis (PCA)

PCA leads to a linear combination (projection) of the original variables of high-dimensional data and thereby, is used to calculate orthogonal variables from raw data matrices. PCA analysis was performed to identify different feature element variables from AAC, DPC and PSSM that are important for distinguishing cyclins from non-cyclins. Thus, it was performed with the objective of obtaining new variables that are uncorrelated among themselves (i.e. orthogonal) from the original ones and to reduce the dimension of data to unity with the minimum loss of information.
Using ''princomp'' function of MATLAB, we extracted the PCs by using the same data matrices which were also used as input for SVM training. The scatter plots of scores of first two principal components for AAC, DPC and PSSM matrices are shown in the Figure 3A, C and D.

Supporting Information


Figure 1 .

1Amino Acid Composition. Frequency of each of the amino acid in cyclin and non-cyclin protein sequences used in the training dataset.

Figure 2 .

2Threshold-independent performance of SVMs. (A) ROC plot of SVMs based on different protein sequence features which depicts relative trade-offs between true positive and false positives. The diagonal line (line of no-discrimination) represents a completely random guess. Closer a point in the upper left corner of the ROC space, better is the prediction as it represents 100% sensitivity (when all true positives are found) and 100% specificity (when no false positives are found). The PSSM based (standalone as well as hybrids) SVM models show a similar prediction having AUC more than 95%. (B) Area under curve (AUC) obtained from the ROC plot. All SVM models are based on RBF kernel unless mentioned. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002605.g002

Figure 3 .

3Component loadings for the first two Principal Components (PC). (A, C, D) Superimposed plot of component loadings of features used (AAC, DPC and PSSM) and training dataset from PCA analysis -showing the feature usage variability, thereby showing what degree the original variables contribute to the PCs. The plot signifies the correlations between amino acids by virtue of its loading scores as well as relative abundance in cyclins and non-cyclins to each of the PC analyzed. Green, red and blue spots represent cyclin, non-cyclins and component loadings of feature used, respectively. (B) PC weight plot of each of the 20 amino acids for the first three PCs of AAC model. The plot signifies the discriminative properties of amino acids to specific PCs by virtue of its loading scores. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002605.g003

Figure 4 .

4CyclinPred server. (A) Snapshot of CyclinPred server (B) Sample prediction result. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002605.g004

F

i~T otal number of amino acid i Total number of amino acids in the protein ð9Þ

F

j~T otal number of dipeptide j Total number of possible dipeptides in the protein ð10Þ

Table 1 .

1Performance of SVM classifiers for various combinations of protein sequence features, kernels, parameters and validation methods.Model 
Feature 
Dm 
Validation 
ACC (%) 
SN (%) 
SP (%) 
MCC 
F1 
Parameters
C 
c
Module1 
AAC 
20 
a 
83.57 
83.82 
83.33 
0.671 
0.712 
1.5 
84
Module2 
DPC 
400 
a 
85.13 
85.29 
84.72 
0.699 
0.734 
30 
12
Module3 
SSC 
60 
a 
80.71 
76.47 
84.72 
0.614 
0.658 
7 
10
Module4 
PSSM 
400 
a 
92.14 
92.64 
91.66 
0.842 
0.851 
32.5 
1
b1 
97.85 
97.05 
98.61 
0.957 
0.889 
47.5 
0.5
b2 
100 
100 
100 
1 
1 
0.5 
100
c1 
i) 88.57 
88.23 
88.88 
0.771 
0.787 
4 
9.6
c2 
ii)94.28 
91.17 
97.22 
0.886 
0.872 
19 
0.5
Hybrid-1 
AAC+DPC 
420 
a 
81.42 
82.35 
80.55 
0.628 
0.682 
880 
0.1
Hybrid-2 
AAC+SSC 
80 
a 
85.71 
89.70 
81.94 
0.717 
0.753 
10.8 
10
Hybrid-3 
DPC+SSC 
460 
a 
81.42 
79.41 
83.33 
0.628 
0.675 
10.8 
10
Hybrid-4 
PSSM+AAC 
420 
a 
91.42 
92.64 
90.27 
0.828 
0.84 
230 
0.1
Hybrid-5 
PSSM+DPC 
800 
a 
91.42 
92.64 
90.27 
0.828 
0.84 
30 
1
Hybrid-6 
PSSM+SSC 
460 
a 
92.14 
92.64 
91.66 
0.842 
0.851 
19.2 
1.5
b1 
98.57 
97.05 
100 
0.971 
0.904 
19.2 
1.5
b2 
100 
100 
100 
1 
1 
0.5 
50
c1 
i) 88.57 
88.23 
88.88 
0.771 
0.787 
0.5 
30
c2 
ii)88.28 
82.35 
86.11 
0.685 
0.753 
3 
7
Hybrid-7 
PSSM+DPC+SSC 
860 
a 
90.0 
91.17 
88.88 
0.80 
0.815 
10 
2
Hybrid-8 
PSSM+DPC+AAC 
820 
a 
91.42 
92.64 
90.27 
0.828 
0.84 
200 
0.1
b1 
95.71 
97.10 
94.46 
0.914 
0.847 
200 
0.1
b2 
100 
100 
100 
1 
1 
0.5 
100
c1 
i) 85.71 
73.52 
97.23 
0.731 
0.862 
0.5 
19
c2 
ii)91.42 
97.05 
86.11 
0.834 
0.774 
0.3 
4
Dm: dimension, a = Jackknife test CV, b1 = self-consistency test (mode 1), b2 = self-consistency test (mode 2), c1 & c2 = holdout-test, SN: sensitivity, SP: specificity, MCC: 
Mathew's Correlation Coefficient, F1: F1 statistics, C: tradeoff value, c: gamma factor (a parameter in RBF kernel). 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002605.t001

Table 2 .

2Estimation of quality for best SVM model for each feature or combinations of features (hybrid models) as compared to random prediction (S).Model 
Feature 
Correct (TP+TN) 
S (%)
Module1 
AAC 
117 
67.12
Module2 
DPC 
119 
69.98
Module3 
SSC 
113 
61.31
Module4 
PSSM 
129 
84.27
Hybrid-1 
AAC+DPC 
114 
62.85
Hybrid-2 
AAC+SSC 
120 
71.47
Hybrid-3 
DPC+SSC 
114 
62.79
Hybrid-4 
PSSM+AAC 
128 
82.85
Hybrid-5 
PSSM+DPC 
128 
82.85
Hybrid-6 
PSSM+SSC 
129 
84.27
Hybrid-7 
PSSM+DPC+SSC 
126 
80.00
Hybrid-8 
PSSM+DPC+AAC 
128 
82.85
TP: true positive, TN: true negative. 
S: percentage of random prediction. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002605.t002

Table S1

S1Training data set sequences from different cyclin subfamilies used in training the SVMs Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002605.s001 (0.04 MB DOC) Table S2 List of organisms and corresponding cyclin sequences included in the training data set. Cyclin sequences from 58 distinct organisms have been used in the training data set. Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002605.s002 (0.07 MB DOC) Dataset S1 Cyclin sequences (Positive data set) used for training the SVMs using different features. Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002605.s003 (0.06 MB DOC) Dataset S2 Non cyclin sequences (Negative data set) used for training the SVMs. Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002605.s004 (0.08 MB DOC) Dataset S3 Independent sequences (Independent data set) used for blind-test performance. Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002605.s005 (0.05 MB DOC)
July 2008 | Volume 3 | Issue 7 | e2605
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org
AcknowledgmentsWe wish to thank the manuscript reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions regarding the manuscript.Author Contributions
Cyclin: a protein specified by maternal mRNA in sea urchin eggs that is destroyed at each cleavage division. T Evans, E T Rosenthal, J Youngblom, D Distel, T Hunt, Cell. 33Evans T, Rosenthal ET, Youngblom J, Distel D, Hunt T (1983) Cyclin: a protein specified by maternal mRNA in sea urchin eggs that is destroyed at each cleavage division. Cell 33: 389-396.
Cyclin synthesis, modification and destruction during meiotic maturation of the starfish oocyte. N Standart, J Minshull, J Pines, T Hunt, Dev Biol. 124Standart N, Minshull J, Pines J, Hunt T (1987) Cyclin synthesis, modification and destruction during meiotic maturation of the starfish oocyte. Dev Biol 124: 248-258.
Cdc2 protein kinase is complexed with both cyclin A and B: evidence for proteolytic inactivation of MPF. G Draetta, F Luca, J Westendorf, L Brizuela, J Ruderman, Cell. 56Draetta G, Luca F, Westendorf J, Brizuela L, Ruderman J, et al. (1989) Cdc2 protein kinase is complexed with both cyclin A and B: evidence for proteolytic inactivation of MPF. Cell 56: 829-838.
Translation of cyclin mRNA is necessary for extracts of activated xenopus eggs to enter mitosis. J Minshull, J J Blow, T Hunt, Cell. 56Minshull J, Blow JJ, Hunt T (1989) Translation of cyclin mRNA is necessary for extracts of activated xenopus eggs to enter mitosis. Cell 56: 947-956.
DAF1, a mutant gene affecting size control, pheromone arrest, and cell cycle kinetics of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. F R Cross, Mol Cell Biol. 8Cross FR (1988) DAF1, a mutant gene affecting size control, pheromone arrest, and cell cycle kinetics of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol Cell Biol 8: 4675-4684.
The WHI1+gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae tethers cell division to cell size and is a cyclin homolog. R Nash, G Tokiwa, S Anand, K Erickson, A B Futcher, Embo J. 7Nash R, Tokiwa G, Anand S, Erickson K, Futcher AB (1988) The WHI1+gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae tethers cell division to cell size and is a cyclin homolog. Embo J 7: 4335-4346.
A family of cyclin homologs that control the G1 phase in yeast. J A Hadwiger, C Wittenberg, H E Richardson, M De Barros Lopes, S I Reed, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 86Hadwiger JA, Wittenberg C, Richardson HE, de Barros Lopes M, Reed SI (1989) A family of cyclin homologs that control the G1 phase in yeast. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 86: 6255-6259.
Specialization and targeting of B-type cyclins. F R Cross, M Yuste-Rojas, S Gray, M D Jacobson, Mol Cell. 4Cross FR, Yuste-Rojas M, Gray S, Jacobson MD (1999) Specialization and targeting of B-type cyclins. Mol Cell 4: 11-19.
Cyclin is a component of maturation-promoting factor from Xenopus. J Gautier, J Minshull, M Lohka, M Glotzer, T Hunt, Cell. 60Gautier J, Minshull J, Lohka M, Glotzer M, Hunt T, et al. (1990) Cyclin is a component of maturation-promoting factor from Xenopus. Cell 60: 487-494.
Herpesvirus saimiri encodes homologues of G protein-coupled receptors and cyclins. J Nicholas, K R Cameron, R W Honess, Nature. 355Nicholas J, Cameron KR, Honess RW (1992) Herpesvirus saimiri encodes homologues of G protein-coupled receptors and cyclins. Nature 355: 362-365.
Evidence for a protein domain superfamily shared by the cyclins, TFIIB and RB/p107. T J Gibson, J D Thompson, A Blocker, T Kouzarides, Nucleic Acids Res. 22Gibson TJ, Thompson JD, Blocker A, Kouzarides T (1994) Evidence for a protein domain superfamily shared by the cyclins, TFIIB and RB/p107. Nucleic Acids Res 22: 946-952.
Cell cycle control in eukaryotes: molecular mechanisms of cdc2 activation. G Draetta, Trends Biochem Sci. 15Draetta G (1990) Cell cycle control in eukaryotes: molecular mechanisms of cdc2 activation. Trends Biochem Sci 15: 378-383.
The cyclin box fold: protein recognition in cell-cycle and transcription control. M E Noble, J A Endicott, N R Brown, L N Johnson, Trends Biochem Sci. 22Noble ME, Endicott JA, Brown NR, Johnson LN (1997) The cyclin box fold: protein recognition in cell-cycle and transcription control. Trends Biochem Sci 22: 482-487.
Pfam: clans, web tools and services. R D Finn, J Mistry, B Schuster-Böckler, S Griffiths-Jones, V Hollich, Nucleic Acids Res. 34Finn RD, Mistry J, Schuster-Böckler B, Griffiths-Jones S, Hollich V, et al. (2006) Pfam: clans, web tools and services. Nucleic Acids Res 34: D247-D251.
The 20 years of PROSITE. N Hulo, A Bairoch, V Bulliard, L Cerutti, B Cuche, Nucleic Acids Res. 36Hulo N, Bairoch A, Bulliard V, Cerutti L, Cuche B, et al. (2008) The 20 years of PROSITE. Nucleic Acids Res 36: D245-D249.
Whole-genome analysis of animal A-and B-type cyclins. C A Nieduszynski, J Murray, M Carrington, Genome Biol. 370Nieduszynski CA, Murray J, Carrington M (2002) Whole-genome analysis of animal A-and B-type cyclins. Genome Biol 3: RESEARCH0070.
Genomewide analysis of core cell cycle genes in Arabidopsis. K Vandepoele, J Raes, De Veylder, L Rouze, P Rombauts, S , Plant Cell. 14Vandepoele K, Raes J, De Veylder L, Rouze P, Rombauts S, et al. (2002) Genome- wide analysis of core cell cycle genes in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 14: 903-916.
Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. S F Altschul, T L Madden, A A Schaffer, J Zhang, Z Zhang, Nucleic Acids Res. 25Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, et al. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 25: 3389-3402.
Knowledge-based analysis of microarray gene expression data by using support vector machines. M P Brown, W N Grundy, D Lin, N Cristianini, C W Sugnet, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 97Brown MP, Grundy WN, Lin D, Cristianini N, Sugnet CW, et al. (2000) Knowledge-based analysis of microarray gene expression data by using support vector machines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97: 262-267.
ESLpred: SVM-based method for subcellular localization of eukaryotic proteins using dipeptide composition and PSI-BLAST. M Bhasin, G P Raghava, Nucleic Acids Res. 32Bhasin M, Raghava GP (2004) ESLpred: SVM-based method for subcellular localization of eukaryotic proteins using dipeptide composition and PSI-BLAST. Nucleic Acids Res 32: W414-419.
Pcleavage: an SVM based method for prediction of constitutive proteasome and immunoproteasome cleavage sites in antigenic sequences. M Bhasin, G P Raghava, Nucleic Acids Res. 33Bhasin M, Raghava GP (2005) Pcleavage: an SVM based method for prediction of constitutive proteasome and immunoproteasome cleavage sites in antigenic sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 33: W202-207.
Large-scale identification of yeast integral membrane protein interactions. J P Miller, R S Lo, A Ben-Hur, C Desmarais, I Stagljar, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 102Miller JP, Lo RS, Ben-Hur A, Desmarais C, Stagljar I, et al. (2005) Large-scale identification of yeast integral membrane protein interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102: 12123-12128.
Support vector machines with profile-based kernels for remote protein homology detection. S Busuttil, J Abela, G J Pace, Genome Inform. 15Busuttil S, Abela J, Pace GJ (2004) Support vector machines with profile-based kernels for remote protein homology detection. Genome Inform 15: 191-200.
Computational prediction of methylation status in human genomic sequences. R Das, N Dimitrova, Xuan Z Rollins, R A Haghighi, F , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 103Das R, Dimitrova N, Xuan Z, Rollins RA, Haghighi F, et al. (2006) Computational prediction of methylation status in human genomic sequences. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103: 10713-10716.
The SBASE domain sequence resource, release 12: prediction of protein domain-architecture using support vector machines. K Vlahovicek, L Kajan, V Agoston, S Pongor, Nucleic Acids Res. 33Vlahovicek K, Kajan L, Agoston V, Pongor S (2005) The SBASE domain sequence resource, release 12: prediction of protein domain-architecture using support vector machines. Nucleic Acids Res 33: D223-225.
Multiclass cancer diagnosis using tumor gene expression signatures. S Ramaswamy, P Tamayo, R Rifkin, S Mukherjee, C H Yeang, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 98Ramaswamy S, Tamayo P, Rifkin R, Mukherjee S, Yeang CH, et al. (2001) Multiclass cancer diagnosis using tumor gene expression signatures. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98: 15149-15154.
Predicting protein-protein interactions from primary structure. J R Bock, D A Gough, Bioinformatics. 17Bock JR, Gough DA (2001) Predicting protein-protein interactions from primary structure. Bioinformatics 17: 455-460.
Classifying G-protein coupled receptors with support vector machines. R Karchin, K Karplus, D Haussler, Bioinformatics. 18Karchin R, Karplus K, Haussler D (2002) Classifying G-protein coupled receptors with support vector machines. Bioinformatics 18: 147-159.
Prediction of protein solvent accessibility using support vector machines. Z Yuan, K Burrage, J S Mattick, Proteins. 48Yuan Z, Burrage K, Mattick JS (2002) Prediction of protein solvent accessibility using support vector machines. Proteins 48: 566-570.
The nature of statistical learning theory. V N Vapnik, SpringerNew YorkVapnik VN (1995) The nature of statistical learning theory. New York: Springer.
Statistical learning theory. V N Vapnik, New YorkVapnik VN (1998) Statistical learning theory. New York ;
. Chichester, WileyChichester [England]: Wiley.
Support vector machine-based method for subcellular localization of human proteins using amino acid compositions, their order, and similarity search. A Garg, M Bhasin, G P Raghava, J Biol Chem. 280Garg A, Bhasin M, Raghava GP (2005) Support vector machine-based method for subcellular localization of human proteins using amino acid compositions, their order, and similarity search. J Biol Chem 280: 14427-14432.
The PSIPRED protein structure prediction server. L J Mcguffin, K Bryson, D T Jones, Bioinformatics. 16McGuffin LJ, Bryson K, Jones DT (2000) The PSIPRED protein structure prediction server. Bioinformatics 16: 404-405.
Advances in kernel methods : support vector learning. B Schölkopf, Cjc Burges, A J Smola, MIT PressCambridge, MassSchölkopf B, Burges CJC, Smola AJ (1999) Advances in kernel methods : support vector learning. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Learning to classify text using support vector machines. T Joachims, Kluwer Academic PublishersBostonJoachims T (2002) Learning to classify text using support vector machines. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Using neural networks for prediction of the subcellular location of proteins. A Reinhardt, T Hubbard, Nucleic Acids Res. 26Reinhardt A, Hubbard T (1998) Using neural networks for prediction of the subcellular location of proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 26: 2230-2236.
Support vector machine approach for protein subcellular localization prediction. S Hua, Z Sun, Bioinformatics. 17Hua S, Sun Z (2001) Support vector machine approach for protein subcellular localization prediction. Bioinformatics 17: 721-728.
The DEF data base of sequence based protein fold class predictions. M Reczko, H Bohr, Nucleic Acids Res. 22Reczko M, Bohr H (1994) The DEF data base of sequence based protein fold class predictions. Nucleic Acids Res 22: 3616-3619.
Swiss-Prot: Juggling between evolution and stability. A Bairoch, B Boeckmann, S Ferro, E Gasteiger, Brief Bioinform. 5Bairoch A, Boeckmann B, Ferro S, Gasteiger E (2004) Swiss-Prot: Juggling between evolution and stability. Brief Bioinform 5: 39-55.
NCBI reference sequences (RefSeq): a curated non-redundant sequence database of genomes, transcripts and proteins. K D Pruitt, T Tatusova, D R Maglott, Nucleic Acids Res. 35Pruitt KD, Tatusova T, Maglott DR (2007) NCBI reference sequences (RefSeq): a curated non-redundant sequence database of genomes, transcripts and proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 35: D61-D65.
PISCES: a protein sequence culling server. G Wang, R L DunbrackJr, Bioinformatics. 19Wang G, Dunbrack RL Jr (2003) PISCES: a protein sequence culling server. Bioinformatics 19: 1589-1591.
Comparison of the predicted and observed secondary structure of T4 phage lysozyme. B W Matthews, Biochim Biophys Acta. 405Matthews BW (1975) Comparison of the predicted and observed secondary structure of T4 phage lysozyme. Biochim Biophys Acta 405: 442-451.
The meaning and use of the area under a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. J A Hanley, B J Mcneil, Radiology. 143Hanley JA, McNeil BJ (1982) The meaning and use of the area under a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. Radiology 143: 29-36.
Prediction of the location and type of beta-turns in proteins using neural networks. A J Shepherd, D Gorse, J M Thornton, Protein Sci. 8Shepherd AJ, Gorse D, Thornton JM (1999) Prediction of the location and type of beta-turns in proteins using neural networks. Protein Sci 8: 1045-1055.
Helical fold prediction for the cyclin box. J F Bazan, Proteins. 24Bazan JF (1996) Helical fold prediction for the cyclin box. Proteins 24: 1-17.
Improved method for predicting beta-turn using support vector machine. Q Zhang, S Yoon, W J Welsh, Bioinformatics. 21Zhang Q, Yoon S, Welsh WJ (2005) Improved method for predicting beta-turn using support vector machine. Bioinformatics 21: 2370-2374.
